confidential. Infrastructure costs include engineering costs and contingencies.
As part of RER, many existing stations will require new platforms and, therefore, additional access
tunnels and shelters may be required. In some cases, stations will undergo significant change due to
additional track or realignment for bus interchanges. Passenger pick-up will also require modification
to support increased ridership. Additional property may be required at many station locations. The
model also accounted for increased parking requirements at expanded stations.
For RER, additional tracks are required at various locations on each corridor. Typically, hourly two-way
service requires a passing track, while a full second track is required where trains operate every
15 minutes. A third or fourth track is required where there are express services or where tracks are
shared between two or more services, which may include inter-city rail services and freight services.
In all scenarios, costs to install Positive Train Control (PTC132) signalling systems on new track were
included. PTC is a set of highly advanced safety technologies designed automatically stop a train
before certain types of accidents occur. It was also noted that, although not yet a legal requirement in
Canada, systems similar to PTC are installed on many RER systems, and were required on passenger
rail routes in the U.S. at the time of publishing the report.
Union Station is the heart of the GO network, and will continue to be the main destination for peak
commuters from across the GTHA. It is anticipated it will also become a significant interchange point
within the GO rail network and attract greater inbound flows of boarding passengers than is the case
today. Also, there is the potential to attract more trips connecting places on either side of Union
Station, which could be a benefit of running more trains through the station as opposed to
terminating many train routes at Union Station, as is common practice today. Improvements to the
tracks on either side of Union Station and to platform infrastructure will enable the number of trains
RER will schedule to pass through and serve Union Station.

IBC Model: Operating Costs
Operating cost rates were calculated in 2014, mostly from existing GO costs, as determined from
analysis of GO general ledger documents. Costs were calculated based on the service levels as
defined, driven by train crew hours, train kilometres, route kilometres, or vehicle kilometres as
appropriate.
Diesel fuel and traction electricity consumption and costs were estimated based on data presented in
the 2010 GO electrification study and actual GO experience. As with diesel prices, no long-term
change was assumed in electricity prices.
Other operating costs in the IBC include payments to the CN and the CP for track use and dispatching
costs that are calculated from existing charges, adjusted for train-kilometres; rolling stock
maintenance costs that are based on Canadian and U.K. experience, including GO’s existing contract

132 Positive Train Control is a system of functional requirements for monitoring and controlling train movements and is a type of train
protection system.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

154

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

for the operation of diesel trains; and infrastructure maintenance that includes costs related to track
maintenance, signalling infrastructure, and other fixed infrastructure costs.

IBC Model: Benefits
Most of the benefits were estimated based on the ridership that was forecast on RER. Note that
increments were for future years, with and without RER. In other words, the comparison was between
what the system would look like under Scenario 1 – Do Minimum and the contemplated system
expansion scenarios. Benefits quantified in the IBC model are transport-related benefits that are
categorized as follows:


Time savings to existing and new transit users.



Auto cost savings to drivers switching to transit.



Quality benefits such as improved comfort, convenience and reliability for transit users.



Safety benefits, primarily reduced accident costs.



Crowding benefits to transit users.



Road-user benefits, cost and time savings to motorists from reduced congestion.

The IBC also considered wider economic and environmental benefits, but these were not captured by
the modelling exercise so were not included in the calculation of the BCRs.

IBC Model: Benefit to Cost Ratios
The BCRs provided information to decision makers regarding how the overall benefits compare to the
overall costs. A ratio greater than one (for example, 2:1) means that the net benefits outweigh the
costs. A ratio less than one (for example, 1:3) means that the costs outweigh the benefits. In the IBC
model, the ratios were calculated by dividing the incremental benefits of a given scenario by the
incremental costs of a given scenario.
The magnitude of the result also communicated important information about the confidence that
decision makers can have in the result. If the BCR is, for example, 3:1, then decision makers can have a
high level of confidence that a scenario is beneficial. The actual costs would have to be three times
higher, or revenues or other benefits one-third of what is expected, before the scenario would prove
not to be beneficial. If the estimated BCR is close to 1:1, then any cost overrun or ridership shortfall
could bring the result below 1:1, making the scenario as proposed not worthwhile.

IBC Model: Cost Factors
As outlined previously inTable 4-29, the IBC applied several cost factors and contingencies to the
capital costs for overhead electrification. These cost factors include:


A cost factor for Environmental Assessment, Engineering and Design that is 15 percent of base
capital costs.



A construction contingency for the on-corridor infrastructure that is 50 percent of base capital
costs.



A productivity and resource cost factor that is 25 percent of base capital costs for on-corridor
infrastructure.



A construction contingency on system-wide infrastructure components of 50 percent of base
capital costs

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

155

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Result of the IBC
The analysis of BCRs in the IBC resulted in the recommendation that Metrolinx proceed with
Scenario 5. Scenario 5 was subsequently adopted by the Province as the plan for RER. Under
Scenario 5, GO would operate all-day services every 15 minutes to Aldershot, Mount Pleasant, Aurora,
Unionville and Oshawa and introduce electrification to Bramalea, Barrie, Stouffville and Pearson
Airport. Electric trains would replace diesels on some or all of the Lakeshore East and West, Kitchener,
Barrie, and Stouffville lines. Under this scenario, the Milton and Richmond Hill lines would continue to
operate at peak times only, using diesel locomotives.

4.4.2

Hydrail System Modelling

Key Characteristics of Cost Estimation
According to the cost estimating and assessment guide published by the United States Government
Accountability Office (GAO), a cost estimate should have certain basic characteristics as listed in
Table 4-31.
TABLE 4-31 BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF COST ESTIMATES133
Characteristic

Description


Estimator must be provided with the system description, ground rules and
assumptions, and technical and performance characteristics



Estimate's constraints and conditions must be clearly identified to ensure the
preparation of a well-documented estimate



All stakeholders should be involved in deciding mission need and requirements and in
defining system parameters and other characteristics



Data should be independently verified for accuracy, completeness, and reliability



Numerous sources of suitable, relevant, and available data should be used



Relevant, historical data should be used from similar systems to project costs of new
systems; these data should be directly related to the system's performance
characteristics



A standard work breakdown structure (WBS), as detailed as possible, should be used,
refining it as the cost estimate matures and the system becomes more defined



The work breakdown structure ensures that no portions of the estimate are omitted
and makes it easier to make comparisons to similar systems and programs

Provision for program risk
and uncertainty



Uncertainties should be identified and allowance developed to cover the cost effect



Known costs should be included and unknown costs should be allowed for

Recognition of inflation



The estimator should ensure that economic changes, such as inflation, are properly
and realistically reflected in the life-cycle cost estimate



Recognition of excluded costs



All costs associated with a system should be included; any excluded costs should be
disclosed and given a rationale

Independent review of
estimates



Conducting an independent review of an estimate is crucial to establishing confidence
in the estimate; the independent reviewer should verify, modify, and correct an
estimate to ensure realism, completeness, and consistency

Revision of estimates for
significant program changes



Estimates should be updated to reflect changes in a system’s design requirements.
Large changes that affect costs can significantly influence program decisions

Clear identification of task

Broad participation in
preparing estimates
Availability of valid data

Standardized structure for
the estimate

133 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

156

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The Cost Estimating Process
At the feasibility stage of project evaluation, it is important to understand how a cost estimate is
developed to understand the level of certainty associated with that estimate; this process is illustrated
on Figure 4-41.
FIGURE 4-41 THE COST ESTIMATING PROCESS

1. Define
the
estimate’s
purpose

2. Develop
the
estimating
plan

3. Define
the
program

4. Determine
the estimating
structure

5. Identify
ground rules &
assumptions
8. Conduct
sensitivity

6. Obtain
the data

7. Develop the point estimate and
compare it to an independent cost
estimate

9. Conduct a
risk and
uncertainty
analysis

The first step involved in cost estimating is defining the estimate’s purpose. At this stage, the project
team will also define the required level of detail and the overall scope of the costing exercise. Cost
estimates have two general purposes: (1) to assist in the evaluation of affordability of a project or
program and to inform the selection of alternative systems and solutions, and (2) to support the
budget process by providing estimates of the funding required to execute a program134.
In the case of the Hydrail feasibility study, the cost estimate serves both purposes; it is designed
primarily to assist in the evaluation of alternative solutions but will also contribute to an understanding
of the potential budget implications of a Hydrail System over the life of the service. All costs directly
related to electrification with Hydrail were modelled and updated in the IBC model. All other costs,
including station improvements, were excluded from the Hydrail costing exercise.
The second step involved in the estimating process is the development of an estimating plan. For
Hydrail, this involved the use of specialist teams to develop cost estimates for the hydrogen related
components of the system. These estimates were then incorporated into IBC model.
The next five steps (steps three through seven) are the beginning of an iterative process that leads to
a point estimate of the program cost. The details of these steps are described in Table 4-32.

134 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009, pg. 47
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

157

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-32 DESCRIPTION OF STEPS INVOLVED IN DEVELOPING A POINT COST ESTIMATE135
Step

Description






Identify the program's purpose and its system and performance characteristics and all
system configurations;
Any technology implications;
Its relationship to other existing systems;
System quantities for development, test, and production;
Deployment and maintenance plans

4. Determine estimating
structure






Define a work breakdown structure (WBS) and describe each element in a WBS dictionary;
Choose the best estimating method for each WBS element;
Identify potential cross-checks for likely cost and schedule drivers;
Develop a cost estimating checklist.

5. Identify ground rules
and assumptions




Clearly define what the estimate includes and excludes;
Identify global and program-specific assumptions, such as the estimate's base year,
including time-phasing and life cycle;
Identify program schedule information by phase and program acquisition strategy;
Identify any schedule or budget constraints, inflation assumptions, and travel costs;
Specify equipment the government is to furnish as well as the use of existing facilities or
new modification or development;
Identify prime contractor and major subcontractors;
Determine technology refresh cycles, technology assumptions, and new technology to be
developed;
Define commonality with legacy systems and assumed heritage savings;
Describe effects of new ways of doing business.

3. Define program
characteristics










6. Obtain data








7. Develop point
estimate and compare it
to an independent cost
estimate










Create a data collection plan with emphasis on collecting current and relevant technical,
programmatic, cost, and risk data;
Investigate possible data sources;
Collect data and normalize them for cost accounting, inflation, learning, and quantity
adjustments;
Analyze the data for cost drivers, trends, and outliers and compare results against rules of
thumb and standard factors derived from historical data;
Interview data sources and document all pertinent information, including an assessment of
data reliability and accuracy;
Store data for future estimates.
Develop the cost model, estimating each WBS element, using the best methodology from
the data collected, and including all estimating assumptions;
Express costs in constant year dollars;
Time-phase the results by spreading costs in the years they are expected to occur, based
on the program schedule;
Sum the WBS elements to develop the overall point estimate;
Validate the estimate by looking for errors like double counting and omitted costs;
Compare estimate against the independent cost estimate and examine where and why
there are differences;
Perform cross-checks on cost drivers to see if results are similar;
Update the model as more data become available or as changes occur and compare
results against previous estimates.

135 Adapted from GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

158

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The eighth step in the estimating process involves a sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis is
designed to reveal how the cost estimate is affected by a change in a single assumption. The cost
estimator must examine the effect of changing one assumption or cost driver at a time while holding
all other variables constant. By doing so, it is easier to understand which variable most affects the cost
estimate. In some cases, a sensitivity analysis can be conducted to examine the effect of multiple
assumptions changing in relation to a specific scenario.
Regardless of whether the analysis is performed on only one cost driver or several within a single
scenario, the difference between sensitivity analysis and risk or uncertainty analysis is that sensitivity
analysis tries to isolate the effects of changing one variable at a time, while risk or uncertainty analysis
examines the effects of many variables changing all at once.
The sensitivity analysis can be useful for identifying areas where more design research could result in
less production cost or where increased performance could be implemented without substantially
increasing cost.136 For Hydrail, sensitivity analysis was used to narrow focus on the variables that had
the largest impact on the cost of the Hydrail program; these variables were subsequently reviewed in
further detail to refine the estimate of the cost input.
The final step in the estimating process is the risk and uncertainty analysis. Because cost estimates are
a prediction of future program costs, uncertainty is always associated with them. For example, data
from the past may not always be relevant in the future, because new manufacturing processes may
change a learning curve slope or new composite materials may change the relationship between
weight and cost. Regulatory conditions can also impact costs. Moreover, a cost estimate is usually
composed of many lower-level WBS elements, each of which comes with its own source of error.
Once these elements are added together, the resulting cost estimate can contain a great deal of
uncertainty.137 This step of the estimating process involves evaluating the risk and uncertainty
associated with a project and incorporating the potential cost of this risk and uncertainty into the total
cost estimate.
Risk and uncertainty reflect the fact that, because a cost estimate is a forecast, there is always a chance
that the actual cost will differ from the estimate. Lack of knowledge about the future is only one
possible reason for the difference. Another equally important reason is the error resulting from
historical data inconsistencies, assumptions, cost estimating equations, and factors typically used to
develop an estimate.138
In the early phases of any program, knowledge about how well technology will perform, whether the
estimates are unbiased, and how external events may affect the program is imperfect. To enable good
decision making, the program estimate must reflect the degree of uncertainty.139
Estimates are more uncertain at the beginning of a project because less is known about the detailed
requirements and the opportunity for change is great. As the project progresses, requirements
become better defined and risk better understood. As this happens, costs become more certain. In
many cases, costs also increase as project development progresses due to a better understanding of
additional requirements translating into previously unforeseen costs. This progression is illustrated in
Figure 4-42.

136 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009, pg. 147-148
137 ibid., pg. 153
138 ibid.
139 ibid., pg. 154
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

159

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-42 CHANGES IN COST ESTIMATE UNCERTAINTY ACROSS THE PROJECT DEVELOPMENT
LIFECYCLE140

It is typical to use four classes to represent the level of design, and associated uncertainty, at different
project stages. These classes are defined as follows:


Class A (Detailed Design - 100 percent design) estimates are pre-tender estimates, based on
completed construction drawings and detailed specifications contained in tender documents. The
expected precision of the estimate ranges from -5 percent to +10 percent of the actual contract
price.



Class B (Design Development - 67 percent design) estimates are design estimates based on an
advanced project design. They are based on design drawings, project specifications and include
detail on the design of electrical, mechanical and IT systems, as well as site requirements. The
expected precision of the estimate ranges from -10 percent to +15 percent of the actual contract
price.



Class C (Schematic Design - 33 percent design) is a planning level estimate usually based on a
Schematic Design and presented in Elemental Format (a budget setting format/technique which
considers the major elements of a project and provides an order of cost estimate based on an
Elemental Cost Analysis of a building project). These estimates establish a preliminary budget
estimate and a baseline against which project costs will be assessed at future project development
milestones. The expected precision of the estimate ranges from -15 percent to +20 percent of the
actual contract price.



Class D (Conceptual Design) estimates are conceptual estimates based on the project scope (the
work that needs to be accomplished to deliver the project) and functional requirements (the
output specifications/deliverables of a project), and are usually presented in unit cost analysis
format (applying a monetary rate to an element, subelement or component per unit of
measurement). The expected precision of the estimate ranges from -20 percent to +30 percent of
the actual contract price.141

140 US Government Accountability Office Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009
141 PPP Canada Schematic Design Estimate Guide, April 2014.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

160

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The current simulation model could be considered a Class D estimate, with an expected accuracy that
ranges from -20 percent to +30 percent of the actual costs. It is expected that the accuracy of the
estimate would improve should the feasibility study for Hydrail lead to a decision to move the project
to the next stage of development. The technology development process that is proceeding in parallel
to this study will further improve the accuracy and reduce the uncertainty of estimate. Estimating
accuracy improves significantly and the uncertainty in cost estimation reduces to a few percentage
points of the actual costs by the time the detail design is complete and the project is ready for
procurement and implementation.
It is important to continually update cost estimates so that decision makers have has the best
information available for making informed decisions. These processes are illustrated in what is
commonly called the Cone of Uncertainty shown on Figure 4-43.
FIGURE 4-43 CONE OF UNCERTAINTY

Development of Contingencies
Contingencies for infrastructure projects represent a mark-up applied to the base construction cost to
account for uncertainties in quantities, and unit costs. Contingencies are also included to capture risk
events during construction.142
At various stages of the estimating process it is possible to represent the uncertainty implications of
various cost estimates using a cumulative probability distribution curve or an S-curve as illustrated in
Figure 4-44.

142 Cost Estimating Manual for WSDOT Projects, March 2008.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

161

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-44 SAMPLE CUMULATIVE DISTRIBUTION CURVE FOR A PROJECT ESTIMATE (FROM THE US
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE COST ESTIMATING AND ASSESSMENT GUIDE, 2009)

The contingency then is the difference between the estimated cost and the budget to achieve a
certain confidence interval. This concept is illustrated in the following example:
The cumulative probability distribution curve provided in Figure 4-44 considers a hypothetical project
with an estimated cost of $825,000. The uncertainty analysis has revealed that this estimate represents
the 40th percentile meaning that there is a 60 percent chance that costs will be greater than the
estimate. Based on this analysis, a decision could be made to increase the project budget to achieve
greater certainty that the project cost will fall within the budgeted amount. For example, if the budget
for this project was increased from $825,000 to $1,096,000 then there would be a 70 percent
probability that project costs would fall within the budgeted amount. The $271,000 difference
between the estimated cost and the budgeted $1,096,000 represents the construction contingency in
this example.143
The level of confidence used to develop the contingency reflects organizational decisions on the level
of risk that is acceptable.

143 US GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide, 2009, pg. 157
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

162

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Limitations
Given the relatively short time frame for the Hydrail analysis, there are some elements of the cost
estimate that have not been completed to the level of detail that could be completed with further
study. These elements of the cost estimate that have not been addressed in the Hydrail simulation
model are outlined as follows:
1. Work Breakdown Structure (WBS): A WBS defines in detail the components necessary to
accomplish a program’s objectives. A WBS can be thought of as an illustration of which tasks will
be accomplished and which components will be delivered to satisfy a program’s requirements.
The WBS diagrams the effort in small, discrete pieces, or elements, to show how each one relates
to the others and to the program as a whole.
The number of levels for a WBS varies from program to program and depends on a program’s
complexity and risk. WBSs need to be expanded to a level of detail sufficient for planning and
successfully managing the full scope of work. However, each WBS should, at the very least, include
three levels:


The first level represents the program as a whole so contains only one element—the program’s
name.



The second level contains the major program segments.



Level three contains the lower-level components or subsystems for each segment.

A sample WBS for a process plant construction144 is shown in Table 4-33 for illustration.
TABLE 4-33 LIST OF SAMPLE WBS ELEMENTS
Level 2 Element
1.1 Plant system design

Level 3 Element
1.1.1 Business requirements
1.1.2 Process models

1.2 Construction

1.2.1 Site development
1.2.2 Civil structure
1.2.3 Thermal systems
1.2.4 Flow systems
1.2.5 Storage systems
1.2.6 Electrical systems
1.2.7 Mechanical systems
1.2.8 Instrument and control systems
1.2.9 Environmental systems
1.2.10 Temporary structure
1.2.11 Auxiliary systems
1.2.12 Safety systems

144 Source: Project Management Institute, Practice Standards for Work Breakdown Structures, project Management Institute, Inc. (2006).
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

163

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-33 LIST OF SAMPLE WBS ELEMENTS
Level 2 Element
1.3 Legal and regulatory

Level 3 Element
1.3.1 Licensing (nongovernment)/permitting (government)
1.3.2 Environmental impact
1.3.3 Labor agreements
1.3.4 Land acquisition

1.4 Testing

1.4.1 System test
1.4.2 Acceptance test

1.5 Start-up
1.6 Project management

Although a detailed WBS has not been developed for this study, different elements of the Hydrail
System have been discussed, and individual components have been identified for costing. The
WBS example does, however, provide some insight into additional costs not currently covered by
the Hydrail simulation, such as legal and regulatory expenses, testing, startup, and project
management expenses. These costs are known elements of a construction project, and although
they may not be accurately modelled in the feasibility study stage, they should be recognized in
the model, and carefully considered when making a decision based on the findings of the analysis.
These cost elements should not be captured under contingencies. By definition, contingency is an
allowance for unknown factors that may result in higher project costs, so it should not include cost
elements that are known but are absent in the cost estimate.
2. Risk analysis: The methodology for developing construction contingencies discussed involves the
use of probabilistic analysis of risk and uncertainty (that is, the contingency represents a markup
applied to the base construction cost to account for uncertainties in quantities and unit costs, and
is defined as the difference between the base cost estimate and the budget to achieve a certain
confidence interval). The confidence interval also depends on decision-makers’ risk appetites. At
this stage in the modelling exercise, contingency amounts have been based on the IBC and on the
technical expertise of the modelling team. At later stages of the exercise, a quantitative risk
assessment will result in a more refined contingency that can be carried into construction and
operations phases of the program.

4.4.3

Comparative Cost/Benefit Assessment of the Simulation
Scenarios

4.4.3.1 Hydrail Analysis
For purposes of this study, the first stage of the financial analysis involved comparing the anticipated
costs associated with Hydrail to those for overhead electrification, using the IBC model. Costs that are
common to both technologies (for example, track and station improvements) were held constant. Key
assumptions (for example, discount rate) were also held constant where reasonable, and adjusted
where necessary. As an example, assumptions regarding service patterns—the key driver behind
revenues and benefits of RER—were assumed to be equal under both technologies. As such, this part
of the study is predicated on an assumption that a Hydrail System would deliver the same level of
service as overhead electrification, as is discussed in Section 4.2.2. Inputs that would change (for
example, a new cost associated with the production of hydrogen and removal of capital costs
associated with overhead electrification) were the focus of the analysis. This allows for a like-for-like
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

164

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

analysis of Hydrail relative to Scenario 5 electrification, and mimics going back in time and adding
Hydrail as an additional scenario for RER in the 2014 analysis. However, as will be shown in this
section, a true like-for-like analysis requires updating certain IBC assumptions to reflect those used for
Hydrail.
As service levels are assumed to be the same, net benefits of the program as captured in the IBC
model do not change under a Hydrail scenario for RER. For purposes of the BCR, benefits are driven
by ridership of the RER system and because ridership is assumed to be the same for Hydrail the
benefits remain constant. There are numerous potential benefits and risks associated with both
overhead electrification and Hydrail that are not captured in the first stage of the IBC analysis. Some
are, however, discussed later in this section and in Section 4.7 where the broader social, economic
and environmental benefits are discussed. Later in this section, the financial analysis will further
examine the impact of Hydrail on capital and operating costs over the lifespan of the RER program,
including sensitivity analysis and potential fiscal impacts to the province.
It should be noted that within the cost items that were considered common to both technologies
there are certain elements that are likely to change between the Hydrail and overhead electric
systems. One example is the cost of property purchases currently considered in the IBC. Part of this
line item represents the cost to purchase land to develop substations that would be required for an
overhead contact system. Such costs would not, however, be required for Hydrail. Conversely,
additional land may be required to service Hydrail vehicles (for example, to replace hydrogen tanks at
specified service intervals) and may have an impact on land requirements within maintenance yards.
However, because the breakdown of cost items like this are not fully understood they have been
carried forward in the Hydrail simulation. Should the feasibility study lead to a decision to continue to
examine Hydrail, more detailed analysis of these costs would be required to provide a full picture of
the cost of each system.
The outputs from the Hydrail System simulation described previously were used to develop a
schedule of Hydrail costs for incorporation into the IBC model. The key cost drivers for the Hydrail
simulation were reviewed and highest and lowest values for these variables were developed. The
ranges for these variables are presented in Table 4-34.
TABLE 4-34 KEY COST DRIVERS FOR HYDRAIL
Highest Value

Lowest Value

Unit

Cost of electricity

76

46

$/MWh

Price of Electrolyzer

823

655

$/kW

Price of Storage

266

141

$/kg

Price of Refuelling

1,396

1,257

$/kg

Price of Dispensing

1.09

0.87

million $/unit

Price of Fuel Cell

1,000

450

$/kW

Lifetime of Electrolyzer

40,000

50,000

hours

Lifetime of Fuel Cell

25,000

40,000

hours

These highest and lowest case values were used to develop a high-cost scenario (where all the
variables were set at worst case levels) and a low-cost scenario (where all the variables were set at best
case levels) for Hydrail. These labels are not intended to apply any judgment of one technology over
another. The values were then used to develop new costs for electrification-related capital cost items,
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

165

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

electrification-related operating cost items, and fleets costs. All other costs described above (for
example, station expansions, signalling) are held constant. All real costs used in the analysis are in
2014 dollars.
The high end and low end for electricity price is estimated using IESO data and an optimized
hydrogen production schedule developed by the technical team. For further details, please refer to
Section 4.3.

4.4.3.2 Application of Cost Factors in the Hydrail Model
As discussed above, contingencies are a key part of the IBC model and, taken together, represent 90
percent of total capital costs. For Hydrail, the approach followed was to carry forward contingencies
and make adjustments based on several factors. First, the cost factor for Environmental Assessment,
Engineering and Design was increased from 15 percent to 30 percent for Hydrail. The application of
HFC technology in the rail industry is still relatively untested (as discussed elsewhere in this report). As
such it is reasonable to assume that the percentage of capital costs applied for engineering and
design should be higher than what was used to model a traditional overhead electric system through
the IBC model. This contingency only applies to initial capital investment and falls to 0 percent as
Hydrail assets need to be replaced or refurbished, reflecting the fact that expertise and experience
will have grown to a point where such events are highly predictable in terms of costs and risks.
Construction contingencies in the IBC model account for uncertainty associated with the cost of the
development and construction of a complex electrified rail system. In the IBC model, the construction
cost contingency for overhead electrification was 50 percent of estimated capital costs. This
contingency has been applied to all civil infrastructure and electrification base costs within the IBC
model. For purposes of this financial analysis, construction cost contingencies used in the IBC model
have been carried forward for Hydrail without change. A 50 percent contingency is reasonable for
capital undertakings where an organization has little experience, in this case signalling, for
electrification, and for the development of hydrogen-powered vehicles. Furthermore, the risk
associated with deploying a new application of a technology at the scale that would be required for
Hydrail, including establishing an entirely new supply chain for the production, transportation and
dispensing of hydrogen, further justifies inclusion of this contingency. Additionally, the contingency is
meant to capture costs that are currently not well understood for both the overhead and electrification
costs – these costs include things like financing costs, operator profit, taxes, and permitting fees.
Finally, a productivity and resource cost factor is applied to the on-corridor infrastructure for overhead
electrification and to all hydrogen related infrastructure for the Hydrail System (in addition to oncorridor infrastructure required for both systems). This cost factor is intended to capture the additional
costs associated with the construction of the RER system in a shorter time frame and more complex
environment than what is typical for similar projects. The productivity and resource factor is applied to
on-corridor infrastructure base costs to account for construction under increased rail traffic conditions
and ongoing service expansions, and includes consideration of limited specialized resources in the
industry (particularly for electrification and hydrogen technologies). This factor has not been applied
to system-wide costs like enhanced train control and maintenance facilities. The productivity and cost
resource factor applied to the overhead electrical system in the IBC is 25 percent and it is understood
that much of this factor accounts for the complexity of installing the overhead infrastructure during live
rail operations meaning much of the work will have to take place overnight, for example. This same
constraint does not exist for Hydrail implementation as capital works would likely not significantly
impact operations on the rail corridor. A potential advantage of Hydrail is the ability to roll out fleet
incrementally and intermingled with existing rolling stock. It is difficult to predict with accuracy at this
stage of the project if there might be disruptions or complications associated with a mixed-fuel fleet,
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

166

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

or the impact construction of hydrogen production and fuelling stations might have on current
operations. As a result, the productivity and cost resource factor for Hydrail has been reduced from
25 percent to 10 percent.
Further refinement is necessary to the cost factors to account for the life cycle of electrification and
Hydrail capital assets. Hydrail will require CAPEX throughout the life of the RER program to replace,
either fully or partially, components of the system like the fuel cells and on-board storage tanks. This
contrasts with overhead electrification where a large upfront CAPEX is expected but, based on the long
life-span of these capital components, ongoing expenditures have been assumed within IBC to be
limited to routine maintenance as opposed to system-wide replacement. While there are ongoing
CAPEX as part of Hydrail, it is expected that there will be greater cost certainty and potential design and
production cost savings as the Hydrail program ages and the technology matures. As such, the cost
escalation factors that are applied to initial CAPEX in the overhead electrification case and the Hydrail
case are not applied to the on-going expenditures related to the replacement or refurbishment of
Hydrail specific capital components. Cost factors discussed in this section are summarized in Table 4-35.
TABLE 4-35 COST FACTORS APPLIED IN THE IBC
Cost Factors Applied in the IBC

Overhead Electrification

Hydrail

Environmental Assessment,
Engineering and Design

15 percent of base capital costs

30 percent of base capital costs

Infrastructure (Corridors)

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs
Productivity and resource factor – 25 percent
of base capital costs

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs
Productivity and resource factor – 10
percent of base capital costs

Infrastructure (System-wide
components)

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs

Contingency – 50 percent of base capital
costs

4.4.4

Sensitivity Analysis

Following the development of the capital and operating costs for the Hydrail System, a sensitivity
analysis was performed to quantify the impact of each individual variable on the be BCR using the
following approach:


All cost variables were set at their high case values to establish a baseline for comparison (that is,
the high scenario).



Each variable was then individually changed to its lowest case while keeping all other variables
unchanged.



The NPV of the following outputs were recorded for each iteration:





Total CAPEX = total initial capital + total replacement cost



Total OPEX = total operating cost + total maintenance cost

The change in NPV was calculated and sorted from highest to lowest.

The sensitivity analysis shows that three variables result in largest variation in the NPV of the selected
outputs:


Cost of electricity



Lifetime of fuel cell



Price of fuel cell

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

167

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The sensitivity analysis shows that all other variables have a negligible effect (that is, below 2 percent)
on the output parameters. The outputs from the sensitivity analysis are presented in Table 4-36. This
analysis was used to guide the modelling team to the variables that require the most precision and
that warrant the most in-depth analysis through conversations with industry and research.
TABLE 4-36 OUTPUT OF THE SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
High

Low

percent Change

76

46

-

NPV of Total OPEX

2,356

1,623

-31 percent

Price of fuel cell ($/kW)

1,000

450

-

NPV of Total CAPEX

2,595

2,070

-20 percent

Lifetime of fuel cell (hours)

25,000

40,000

-

NPV of Total CAPEX

2,595

2,325

-10 percent

Cost of electricity ($/MWh)

4.4.5

Model Benchmarking

In addition to the financial analysis presented in this section, the hydrogen pricing model was
compared to publicly available case studies. This exercise provides a benchmark for the result of the
modelling exercise used in Hydrail feasibility study.
Several key technologies for producing hydrogen were studied by the H2A145 team with expertise in
design and advancement of these technologies within the United States Department of Energy
Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program146. One case study covers future estimates for central hydrogen
production using PEM technology. The model inputs were modified to match requirements of the
Hydrail project (that is, total hydrogen production, price of electricity, unit cost of electrolyzer and
total capacity installed), as shown in Table 4-37.
TABLE 4-37 INPUT PARAMETERS FOR A CENTRAL HYDROGEN PRODUCTION FACILITY
Cost Component

Unit

DOE

CNL

tonnes /day

48.5

48

price of electricity

$/MWh

66

63

cost of electrolyzer

$/kW

508

508

lifetime of stack

years

10

15

electrolyzer capacity installed

MW

293

281

Hydrogen production

The results of the DOE model were then compared against the Hydrail simulation model. The results
of this analysis are shown in Table 4-38.

145 H2A, which stands for Hydrogen Analysis, was first initiated in February 2003 to better leverage the combined talents and capabilities of
analysts working on hydrogen systems, and to establish a consistent set of financial parameters and methodology for analyses
(https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/h2a_analysis.html)
146 Please refer to https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/h2a_prod_studies.html
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

168

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-38 RESULTS OF THE CENTRAL HYDROGEN PRODUCTION FACILITY MODELS
Cost Component

DOE

Hydrail Simulation

Total direct capital

$ 148,259,713

$ 147,957,111

Total indirect depreciable capital

$ 27,817,995

$-

$ 3,272,705

$-

Engineering and design

$-

$-

Project contingency

$-

$-

$ 24,545,290

$-

$ 176,077,708

$-

$ 305,320

$-

$ 176,383,028

$ 147,957,111

Capital Costs ($)

Site Preparation

Up-Front Permitting Costs
(legal and contractor fees)
Total depreciable cost
Total non-depreciable cost
Total capital cost

Operating Costs ($)
Fixed operating cost (maintenance)

$ 4,521,768

$ 2,351,710

Variable operating cost (cost of electricity)

$ 58,588,148

$ 58,199,567

Total operating cost

$ 63,109,916

$ 60,551,277

0.99

0.56

Variable operating cost

3.31

3.31

Fixed operating cost

0.26

0.13

Other costs

0.23

-

Initial Equity Depreciable Capital

0.00

-

Cash for Working Capital Reserve

0.02

-

Debt Interest

0.11

-

Taxes

-0.01

-

Principal Payment

0.10

-

Cost of production ($/kg)

5.02

4.01

Cost of hydrogen production ($/kg)
Depreciable cost of capital

The results of the two models are categorized as follows:


Capital costs: total capital cost estimated under the DOE model is approximately $30 million
(19 percent) higher than those estimated by the Hydrail simulation. This is because some up-front
costs (including permitting and legal costs), as well as site preparation costs, are not included in
the Hydrail simulation model. It is important to note, however, that the two models produce
comparable results for direct capital costs.



Operating costs: maintenance costs are estimated to be higher in the DOE model than in the
Hydrail simulation model by approximately $2.5 million per year. The DOE model yields a result
for operating costs that is very close to the Hydrail simulation model (4 percent variance).

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

169

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

This analysis shows that the cost of hydrogen production (which is represented as $ per kg of
hydrogen produced) is 20 percent lower in the Hydrail simulation model than the DOE model for the
following reasons:




Approximately half of the difference is driven by the indirect capital costs. The following cost
elements have not been captured in the Hydrail simulation model:


Site preparation cost



Permitting and legal costs

The remaining half is driven by financing costs and taxes associated with producing hydrogen that
are not currently captured in the Hydrail simulation model. These costs include:


Initial equity depreciable capital;



Cash for working capital reserve;



Debt interest;



Principal payment; and



Taxes.

4.4.6

Results of the Hydrail Modelling Exercise

The process discussed above outlines a systematic method for developing cost estimates. This
process was used to develop, refine, and understand the cost estimate for the Hydrail System and
how this estimate compares to the cost estimates for overhead electrification as presented in the 2014
IBC model.
The IBC analysis resulted in a BCR of 3.07 for overhead electrification (Scenario 5). The update to the
IBC model for Hydrail results in a BCR of 3.01 under the low-cost scenario and 2.65 under the highcost scenario. According to this analysis, the costs of Hydrail and overhead electrification appear to be
comparable in the low-cost scenario and the overall benefits continue to outweigh the costs of the
system in all scenarios.
Table 4-39 provides a high-level overview of the 60-year NPV costs and BCRs under the traditional
overhead, and low, and high scenarios for Hydrail.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

170

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-39 COSTS AND BCRS FOR ELECTRIFICATION SCENARIOS (60-YEAR NPV COSTS WITH A BASEYEAR OF 2014)*
Traditional
Overhead
Electrification
($ M)

Low Hydrail
System

High Hydrail
System

($ M)

($ M)

A

12,277

12,706

13,309

Initial Capital for Energy System Infrastructure
(2015 to 2024)

B1

1,762

576

712

Ongoing Capital for Energy System
Infrastructure (2025 to 2074)

B2

-

257

356

B=B1+B2

1,762

833

1,068

Initial Capital for Fleet (2015 to 2023)

C1

2,260

2,703

2,986

Ongoing Capital for Fleet (2024 to 2074)

C2

1,845

2,132

2,531

C=C1+C2

4,105

4,835

5,517

D=B+C

5,867

5,668

6,585

E

7,074

7,074

7,074

B=D+E

12,942

12,742

13,659

A+B

25,218

25,497

27,030

3.07

3.01

2.65

Operating Costs
Capital Costs

Energy System

Fleet
Total Capital Cost for Energy System and
Fleet
Other Capital Costs
Total Capital Costs (D + E)
Total Costs
BCR
*Numbers may not sum due to rounding.

In Table 4-39, costs are represented as follows:
(A) The total operating costs for the system, including estimates for the cost of maintaining rolling
stock, hydrogen equipment, the overhead system, stations, and other components of the RER
system.
(B) The total capital cost of the system, including costs spent during construction of the system and
capital expenditures required throughout the 60-year life of the RER program.
(C) The total capital cost for the energy system and the fleet; for overhead electrification, this includes
the cost of the catenary system and all electric vehicles and for Hydrail this includes all hydrogen
equipment (both on- and off-vehicle equipment) and the cost for the vehicles themselves.
(D) The cost for the energy system; for overhead electrification, this is the cost of the catenary system
and for Hydrail this is the cost of the off-vehicle hydrogen equipment (for example, electrolyzers
and distribution equipment).
(E) The cost for the fleet; for electrification, this includes electric locomotives and EMUs and for
Hydrail the cost represents locomotives and EMUs including the on-vehicle hydrogen equipment
that will be used to power the vehicles (that is, fuel cells, batteries, and storage tanks).
(F) Other capital costs required to develop the RER system including station modifications and track
upgrades.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

171

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Under both (D) and (E), initial capital (that is, capital spent during the construction or development
phase of RER) and ongoing capital (that is, capital spent once the RER program is operational) are
included as separate items. The intention is to illustrate the difference between overhead electrification
and Hydrail as it relates to the distribution of spending over the lifetime of the RER program.
When undertaking a like-for-like analysis through the IBC model, Hydrail shows a slight to moderate
disadvantage when compared to overhead electric. This suggests higher costs will be observed
throughout the life of the RER program. Under a low scenario the model shows only a small decline in
the BCR between when compared to the overhead electrification case. Conversely, if a costlier
scenario materializes (for example, electricity prices are higher in 2040 than expected), the outcome
could impact into reduced BCR for Hydrail. The sensitivity analysis suggests that there are three
factors that will have the most significant impact on cost. In order of importance these are: price of
electricity; lifespan of fuel cells; and cost of fuel cells. Given the potential impact on the final results,
these are the items where further analysis should focus.
It is important to emphasize that the costs contained throughout the models (including IBC) are not
intended to reflect the price to install and manage the system under a typical commercial
arrangement. Such information would only be clearly understood following a market sounding
exercise followed by a competitive procurement process.
Other Benefits of Hydrail
Other benefits of Hydrail (for example, establishing a hydrogen economy, local jobs) have been captured
by a separate modelling exercise within the feasibility study. The socio-economic study examines:


Employment and GDP benefits



A reduction in disruption related to the construction of an overhead system in a live rail corridor.



The potential to develop a 'hydrogen economy' in the province that could spur the deployment of
hydrogen for other applications.



Supporting deployment of hydrogen for commercial use in transportation (for example,
passenger vehicles, buses, commercial vehicle).



The opportunity to support development of hydrogen based energy storage systems, which will
facilitate the increased use of renewable energy in Ontario's electricity system w harness surplus
energy

4.4.7

Updates to the IBC

Metrolinx is currently in the process of updating the cost estimate for overhead electrification that was
developed as part of the IBC. As discussed earlier in this chapter, during early stages of a project, where
the design of a system is still in initial stages of development, large variability can be expected in cost
estimates. As more detailed design is completed, costs are better understood and, in many cases, rise as a
better understanding of the project often reveals costs not previously accounted for.
Based on the update to overhead electrification costs currently underway, it appears that costs for
overhead electrification will be higher than estimated in the IBC. The updated costs will not be
finalized until after the completion of the Hydrail feasibility study and, therefore, these updates are not
reflected in this analysis.
Based on the work currently ongoing to update the cost estimate for overhead electrification there is
an expectation that CAPEX and OPEX will be higher than envisioned in the IBC. Adjusting for these
higher costs, the BCR in the IBC could fall below 3.07, as is currently captured by the IBC model.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

172

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The estimated BCR for Hydrail may also change due to refinements in the technical model or changes
to electricity policies. As illustrated in Figure 4-45, further modelling work may result in greater
hydrogen required for the Hydrail System, which could result in increased capital and operating costs.
Consequently, the BCR would be reduced from 2.65 as currently estimated in the high-cost case. On
the other hand, an electricity policy change that results in lower electricity prices will improve the BCR
from 3.01 as currently estimated in the low-cost case.
It is however noted that any future electricity policy change that results in lower electricity prices could
also improve the BCR for the overhead electrification case.
FIGURE 4-45 POTENTIAL CHANGES IN THE BCR OF AN OVERHEAD ELECTRIC SYSTEM COMPARED
TO HYDRAIL

*Arrows are meant to illustrate potential higher and lower BCR ranges based on analysis to be completed in
the future.

4.4.8

Other Considerations

It is also important to note that there are several key considerations that are not captured by the IBC
analysis that are critical to the overall business case and a decision on the technology that should be
used to electrify the GO network. These considerations as discussed below include potential benefits
from Hydrail, areas where it is unclear whether there is a benefit or a risk, and risks associated with
deployment of Hydrail.
First, the IBC model work likely does not completely account for the value of the risk associated with
constructing an overhead electric system in a live rail corridor. Although an adjustment has been
made to the Productivity and Resource cost factor to reflect reduced complexity associated with the
construction of a Hydrail System, this adjustment likely does not fully capture the entire value of
avoided risk that would be inherent to installing an overhead contact system on a live rail corridor,
something that is rarely done in the rail industry.
Second, Hydrail may present an opportunity to more gradually deploy HFC-powered train sets and to
potentially achieve this roll out with little to no disruption to existing rail operations. RER service levels
are currently scheduled to begin in 2024 accordingly, this is when additional operating costs begin
and related benefits are expected to be realized. If Hydrail is deployed, commencement of RER
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

173

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

services may not be binary as is the case for overhead electrification. As Hydrail vehicles are delivered
to Metrolinx, it may be possible to deploy these vehicles on a portion of the GO network before
bringing the entire system online. This could potentially allow RER benefits to be realized earlier than
would be the case through overhead electrification. While this phased roll-out could help to realize
additional benefits, it could also increase operational complexity as some lines would be operating at
significantly increased service levels and speeds that may be difficult to coordinate with slower routes
through Union Station. This potential benefit could also be negated because of the need to develop a
hydrogen supply chain across the GO network. Further analysis will need to be undertaken to
understand if there may be regulatory, safety, operational or commercial considerations that may
hinder ability to seamlessly deploy a mixed fleet of hydrogen and diesel train sets as is assumed in
making this statement.
Third, the IBC model work likely does not sufficiently capture the comparison between maintenance
requirements of the two systems. While in concept, maintenance of fuel cells can be done without
significant disruption, the entire maintenance regime for a Hydrail train is not fully understood. In
some cases, manufacturers may require that maintenance is undertaken by their own trained
workforce, or a workforce with certain credentials. This could introduce operational complexities if, for
example, different workers are needed to maintain various components of the hydrogen system. The
maintenance cycle may be further complicated by regulatory requirements associated with, for
example, replacement of tanks and how the system is safety tested after such events. Furthermore, the
amount of downtime associated with servicing Hydrail vehicles compared to traditional electric
vehicles is unknown. This could impact the configuration of maintenance facilities and the size of the
fleet. The key point is not that the costs will be higher, but that maintenance requirements will be
more complex and will require different processes to be followed, potential impacts on facilities and
fleet, and likely a higher skilled workforce. The specific nature of these differences is unknown and has
not been quantified through the IBC model.
Forth, it is reasonable to assume that accreditation requirements of those undertaking work on the
hydrogen related components of the trains will likely be more stringent than for those servicing
traditional electric vehicles. The potential for limited availability of technicians to service the Hydrail
System is not captured by the Hydrail System model. Specialized technicians will be required to
service Hydrail vehicles and this is expertise that does not currently exist in Ontario at the scale that
would be required. The lack of a skilled workforce could lead to higher costs at the outset as the
industry trains technicians. To meet demand, the Province of Ontario may need to invest in
educational programs to develop this skilled workforce. Development of a new work force has
potential long-term benefits for the Ontario economy. These benefits are discussed in Section 4.7 this
study. The key point is that the lack of a skilled workforce introduces risk to the deployment of Hydrail
that would need to be overcome to ensure a smooth transition into service.
Fifth, a significant potential benefit of Hydrail is the opportunity it presents to electrify more of the go
RER network than would otherwise be possible through overhead electrification. This includes
electrification of the outer areas of the network where overhead electrification would be cost
prohibitive, and also to electrify corridors that the IBC model assumes would continue to run diesel
service over the course of the 60 year RER program. Broader electrification could mean increased
ridership as services will be more frequent and faster and associated increases to the overall benefits
associated with the RER program. These benefits would be realized assuming agreements to operate
HFC-powered trains can be negotiated in areas of the GO network that are not owned by Metrolinx.
Sixth, while Hydrail related costs have been modelled, there is inherent uncertainty in such processes.
On one hand, it is difficult to predict the extent to which capital and operating costs could come down
in the future in light of a potential surge in establishing hydrogen economies globally. This would
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

174

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

come through increased competition, more real-world cases of implementation, and likely more
research funding going into the technology. Similarly, it is very difficult to predict with accuracy the
impact Hydrail could have on future energy prices in Ontario. Modelling work that has been
undertaken is based on Ontario’s current energy outlook. It is well-understood that the outlook is
based on one scenario where disruptions like mass deployment of electrical vehicles or significant
downturns in the economy have not been assumed. As explained in Section 4.3, the load presented
by Hydrail could lead to an increase in the wholesale price of electricity during the periods electricity
is demanded by the Hydrail System. This will be the case if a situation arises where the availability of
surplus baseload significantly declines due to increased adoption of electric vehicles and potentially
increased use of electricity for home heating as is contemplated in Ontario’s Climate Change Action
Plan.
Seventh, Hydrail has the potential to be an anchor point for Ontario’s hydrogen economy. Lack of
infrastructure is regularly sited as the key barrier to wide spread adoption of hydrogen technologies.
The scale of Hydrail could provide that essential backbone that is needed to make hydrogen a viable
technology option for commercial and personal transportation and for other purposes. To make this a
reality, the hydrogen supply chain for Hydrail would likely need to be purposely designed and
procured to ensure the broader potential benefits are realized. If, as an example, the fuelling network
was purposely built for Hydrail, those broader benefits may be missed. Should a hydrogen supply
chain be established and anchored in a long-term agreement for the provision of a certain amount of
hydrogen to supply the Hydrail System, and that system also is used for other commercial
applications, the price could be significantly different. The Hydrail analysis does not capture the
potential benefits associated with such arrangements. Related to this point, Hydrail has the potential
to facilitate continued efforts to decarbonize Ontario’s electricity system and to support continued
installation of renewable energy production capabilities as it provides a storage medium that is not
currently available. As per above, this would require that the hydrogen supply chain is effectively
open for purposes broader than Hydrail.
Finally, it is very difficult to quantify the risk associated with deployment of Hydrail at the scale that
would be required to replace plans for overhead electrification. While all aspects associated with the
production, storage, dispensing and use of hydrogen in fuel cells has been proven internationally, it
has not been accomplished in a rail setting at anywhere near the scale being contemplated in Ontario
and it has yet to be tested on rail vehicles that are comparable in terms of size and weight to what
would be required to meet RER service levels as contemplated in the IBC.

4.4.9

Fiscal Analysis

I It is important to note that although the NPV of the cost of both systems appear to be similar, there
are significant differences in the timing of expenditures. For the overhead system, it is expected that
much of the capital cost will be incurred near the beginning of the project as the overhead contact
system is constructed. For Hydrail, however, the initial capital cost is expected to be lower but the
recurring CAPEX to refurbish or replace hydrogen equipment is expected to be higher than for the
overhead system.
The combined impact of capital investment and operating and maintenance costs (i.e., the fiscal
analysis) is analyzed in this section as separate operating and capital cost results that were presented
in the previous sections do not clearly show how the investment affects annual budgets. A fiscal
analysis has been completed with respect to the following four categories:


Amortized cost: annual amortization cost of capital assets. The effect of initial capital investment
will appear in the books under the amortized cost of investment. It is assumed that initial capital
investment for overhead electrification will be amortized linearly over 50 years (that is, from 2024

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

175

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

to 2074). Hydrail’s initial capital, however, will be depreciated at different rates depending on the
asset type. For instance, fuel cells have a significantly higher depreciation rate comparing to
storage tanks due to their shorter life span. Components of the Hydrail System were depreciated
at the rates shown in Table 4-40.
TABLE 4-40 HYDRAIL SYSTEM – DEPRECIATION RATE
Lifetime

Depreciation Rate

Lifetime

Depreciation
Rate

Lifetime

Depreciation
Rate

Electrolyzer

15

7 percent

12

8 percent

Storage (including compressor)

20

5 percent

20

5 percent

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Refuelling (including compressor)

20

5 percent

20

5 percent

Dispensing

10

10 percent

10

10 percent

Fuel cell

9

11 percent

6

17 percent

Battery system

10

10 percent

10

10 percent

On-board storage tanks

15

7 percent

15

7 percent

Capital Assets

Distribution (including compressor)



Cost of financing: annual cost of debt. It is assumed that the initial capital investment is fully
financed by debt. The debt is assumed to be issued at a rate of 3.5 percent annually, maturing in
30 years for both overhead electrification and Hydrail.



Operating cost: annual cost of electricity. As explained in Section 4.3, the volume and unit cost of
electricity was estimated using data provided by IESO and the Hydrail simulation model. The average
annual operating costs for the first 10 years of operation was then estimated for comparison.



Maintenance cost: annual maintenance cost. The maintenance cost for Hydrail was derived from
the Hydrail simulation model.

The result of the fiscal analysis is presented in Table 4-41. The difference between total annual costs of
overhead electrification and low- and high-cost Hydrail scenarios is also presented in Table 4-41.
Under the low-cost scenario, Hydrail would result in an average decrease of $31 million in
Government’s expenses over the first 10 years of operations. Under high-cost scenario, Hydrail would
result in an average increase of $55 million over the same operating period.
TABLE 4-41 FISCAL IMPACT – HYDRAIL COMPARED TO OVER-HEAD ELECTRIFICATION
IBC

Hydrail
(low)

Difference

Hydrail
(high)

Difference

Amortized cost

42

55

20

99

63

Cost of Financing

73

25

(48)

34

(39)

Operating cost*

34

35

1

61

27

Maintenance cost*

17

14

(3)

20

3

Total annual costs

160

129

(31)

214

54

Comparison

*The incremental maintenance cost from IBC model

This analysis is based on the information provided by Metrolinx represents what is available at the
time of the report’s publication. The analysis should be reviewed and further analyzed by Metrolinx to
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

176

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

develop a final conclusion on the fiscal impact of the implementation of the overhead electric and
Hydrail systems.

4.4.10 Findings
The comparison between Hydrail and overhead electrification, as envisioned in the IBC, illustrates
based on the information available, that total capital and operating costs for Hydrail are either similar
more costly than overhead electrification. In both the low- and high-cost cases for Hydrail, total
operating costs are expected to be higher than for an overhead system, as estimated in 2014.
The higher capital cost for the Hydrail System is primarily driven by the requirement for more frequent
CAPEX required to replace the assets in the Hydrail System, due to the shorter lifespan of the assets.
In the low-cost scenario, the higher ongoing capital requirement is counter-balanced by lower initial
capital required in the Hydrail System.
Although an attempt has been made to understand and account for the variability in cost estimates
that is inherent at the feasibility-testing stage, it remains important to emphasize the uncertainty in
both the cost estimates for Hydrail and for overhead electrification. While the BCRs for Hydrail and
overhead electrification are similar, with overhead electrification showing only marginally lower costs
than Hydrail under the low-cost scenario, further design is required to advance the cost estimate of
both systems to allow for a complete picture of the cost difference.
The findings presented are based on NPV estimation. An attempt has been made to translate the
analysis into fiscal terms because the government’s decision-making depends heavily on the fiscal
impact of the project. As discussed in Section 4.4.9, the capital and operating costs of the Hydrail
System would result in an overall annual expense ranging between $129 million and $214 million in
the low- and high-cost scenarios, respectively. The variation between the scenarios is primarily driven
by the difference in amortized capital costs that results from higher unit costs and shorter life spans of
the Hydrail System equipment in the high-cost scenario. The annual operating cost also increases
materially as a result of higher cost of electricity considered in the high-cost scenario. This analysis
requires further review and confirmation by the Metrolinx finance team, at which time a comparison
between Hydrail and overhead electrification scenarios could be considered and the associated
impact on capital and operating costs that will be carried in the provincial fiscal plan can be assessed.

4.4.11 Next Steps
As discussed, a more detailed estimate for Hydrail should include costs like permitting and financing
costs, and would also include a more detailed analysis of risk and the risk-related costs; this will
provide a more accurate picture of the total costs of a Hydrail System. At the same time, work should
be completed to update the overhead electrification costs. The IBC was completed in 2014 and,
similar to the requirement for a more detailed assessment of Hydrail related costs, a more detailed
assessment of overhead electrification, based on a more current understanding of costs should be
conducted. This will allow for a more complete comparison of Hydrail and overhead electrification.
Additionally, the focus of the financial modelling process to-date has been the total cost of the Hydrail
and overhead electric systems. This does not represent the price of system to Metrolinx—further
modelling work should consider things like procurement and financing costs to help provide a more
