
Scooters

101

0

Buses and shuttle buses

110

28

Light commercial vehicles

38

0

Other or unknown vehicle types

93

1

899

102

2,159

1,397

Active Vehicles
Passenger Vehicle Total

Planned Vehicles in 2017
Total Vehicles by the End of 2017

Initially only in Japan, in 2017, Toyota launched a fuel-cell-powered bus adapting the Mirai
architecture with 2 of the Mirai’s fuel cell stacks and 10 of its hydrogen tanks, which provide
considerable range. Indicating a significant commitment to fostering HFC development, Toyota is
offering royalty-free use of their related suite of patents until the end of 2020.
Both the Honda fuel-cell-powered Clarity and Hyundai’s fuel-cell-powered Tucson are only available
in Southern California, where there are enough hydrogen fuelling stations. Their specifications are
broadly comparable to Toyota’s Mirai.
Fuel cells for vehicle propulsion on road vehicles, such as cars and sports utility vehicles (SUVs), are
growing rapidly in recent years, as indicated on Figure 3-16.

58 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) and U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). 2016a. International Hydrogen Vehicles.
Spreadsheet data. Accessed October 2017.
http://hydrogen.pnl.gov/sites/default/files/data/International_Hydrogen_Fueled_Vehicles_8.xlsx.
59 Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) and U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). 2016b. U.S. Hydrogen Vehicles. Spreadsheet data.
Accessed October 2017. http://hydrogen.pnl.gov/sites/default/files/data/US_Hydrogen-Fueled Vehicles_6.xlsx.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

59

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 3-16 PEM FUEL CELL CONSUMER VEHICLES SOLD60 IN THE LAST 6 YEARS

3.3.1.4 Material Handling Vehicles
In Balzac, Alberta, Walmart’s new perishable distribution centre relies entirely on PEM-fuel-cellpowered forklifts and palette trucks61. Walmart chose this technology after 18,000 hours of field
testing.
Amazon is spending US$70 million to replace its forklift batteries in 11 warehouses with HFCs62.
In contrast to batteries of any type, the fuel cells in this near continuous application are expected to
operate for 10 years. This is a new enough application that the PEM fuel cell lifetime is a projection.
Nonetheless, the projection is an indication of confidence in the lifetime of PEM fuel cells that
manufacturers can now deliver; after their design life, they can be rebuilt. Some applications require
operation at low temperatures, and Walmart’s test operations were unimpaired down to -29°C.
The shipping industry (cargo ships, primarily) already uses fuel cells in various services63, including
propulsion, onboard power generation, and CHP. This highlights the scaling and duty flexibility of
various fuel cell types, including PEM fuel cells.

60 The International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT). 2017. Developing hydrogen fueling infrastructure for fuel cell vehicles: A status
update. Briefing prepared by Aaron Isenstadt and Nic Lutsey. October. Accessed October 2017.
http://theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/Hydrogen-infrastructure-status-update_ICCT-briefing_04102017_vF.pdf
61 Canadian Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Association (CHFCA). 2016. Case Study - Walmart Canada Fuel Cell Forklift Fleet. Accessed October
2017. http://www.chfca.ca/say-h2i/materials-handling/walmart-canada-fuel-cell-forklift-fleet
62 ars Technica. 2017. Amazon will replace some of its battery forklifts with hydrogen fuel cell ones. Conde Nast. April 5. Accessed October
2017. https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2017/04/amazon-will-replace-some-of-its-electric-forklifts-with-hydrogen-fuel-cellones/
63 DNV GL - Maritime. 2017. Study on the Use of Fuel Cells in Shipping. EMSA European Maritime Safety Agency. Tomas Tronstad, Hanne
Høgmoen Åstrand, Gerd Petra Haugom, and Lars Langfeldt, authors. Version 0.1. January. Accessed October 2017.
www.emsa.europa.eu/emsa-documents/latest/download/4545/2921/23.html

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

60

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

3.3.1.5 Public Transit
The public transit deployments of hydrogen-powered vehicles have begun through HFC-powered
buses, mostly. There are about 150 buses currently in operation around the world (as shown in
Table 3-2), and hundreds of buses are planned to be introduced by various transit companies in the
next few years as part of the decarbonization targets set by the governments in countries such as
China and members of the European Union (EU) to meet their commitments to the Paris Agreement
of the United Nations (UN) Framework Convention on Climate Change, Article 4.1964.
For buses, Ballard’s fuel cells have now passed 25,000 hours of operation without significant
maintenance in a small fleet of vehicles being operated by Transport for London in the United
Kingdom (UK). Deployed in 15 countries in the past 10 years, Ballard claims a cumulative
11 million km of operation in revenue service in a wide range of climatic conditions and duty cycles65.
The pace of deployment of fuel-cell-powered buses is accelerating rapidly. Bloomberg reported66
that in September 2016, Ballard began delivering the first of 330 fuel cell buses to two cities in
Guangdong province, Yunfu and Foshan. That order alone will quadruple the global fleet of
hydrogen-powered buses. Most recently, on June 8, 2017, Hydrogenics signed a Purchase and
License Agreement with Blue-G New Energy Science and Technology Corporation for 1,000 fuel cell
bus power modules67—presumably for 500 buses.

3.3.1.6 Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (European Union)
The Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCHJU) is a substantial organization launched in 2014
under the EU’s 6th Framework Programme for Research and continued under the EU Horizon 2020
Framework. The partners are committed to supporting the program until at least 2024. It is led by
companies representing the entire supply chain for fuel cell and hydrogen energy technologies. The three
members of the FCHJU are the European Commission, fuel cell and hydrogen industries represented
by Hydrogen Europe, and the research community represented by Hydrogen Europe Research.
To quote from their website68:
“This is a unique public private partnership supporting research, technological
development and demonstration (RTD) activities in fuel cell and hydrogen energy
technologies in Europe. Its aim is to accelerate the market introduction of these
technologies, realising their potential as an instrument in achieving a carbon-lean
energy system.”

64 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 2017. The Paris Agreement. October 12. Accessed November 2017.
http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php
65 Ballard Power Systems (Ballard). 2017. "Ballard Powered Fuel Cell Electric Bus Achieves 25,000 Hours of Revenue Operation."
Newsroom. August. Accessed October 2017. http://ballard.com/about-ballard/newsroom/news-releases/2017/08/29/ballard-powered-fuelcell-electric-bus-achieves-25-000-hours-of-revenue-operation
66 Bloomberg L.P. 2017. China's Buses Bolster Ballard's Three-Decade Quest for Hydrogen. Natalie Obiko Pearson, author. March 26.
Accessed October 2017. https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-03-26/china-s-buses-bolster-ballard-s-three-decade-quest-forhydrogen
67 Hydrogenics. 2017b. "Hydrogenics Signs Purchase and License Agreement valued at over 50M USD for 1,000 Fuel Cell Bus Power
Modules." News & Updates. June 8. Accessed November 2017. http://www.hydrogenics.com/2017/06/08/hydrogenics-signs-purchase-andlicense-agreement-valued-at-over-50m-usd-for-1000-fuel-cell-bus-power-modules/
68 Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCHJU). 2017. Who We Are. Accessed October 2017. http://www.fch.europa.eu/page/whowe-are.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

61

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Its stated objective is to:
“Overcoming barriers to deployment: There are still many technical and non-technical
barriers to overcome before fuel cell and hydrogen technology is widely commercially
available. A concentrated effort of all players is necessary, because the research
needed to develop the technologies is often so complex that no single company or
public research institution can perform it alone. Funding contributed by the partners
has ranged upward of €600,000 in each of the six-year Framework periods and is
currently over €200,00 per year.”
The FCHJU appreciates the case for deployment of hydrogen and fuel cells:
“Fuel cells, as an efficient conversion technology, and hydrogen, as a clean energy
carrier, have a great potential to contribute to addressing energy challenges facing
Europe. They will allow renewable energy technology to be applied to transport,
facilitate distributed power generation, and help Europe cope with the intermittent
character of renewables such as wind power.”
They also appreciate the need for support of ongoing development and for building hydrogen supply
infrastructure ahead of the demand that can only appear when fuelling is widely available.
With its massive combination of the funding of private industry backed by large, multiyear
government contributions from across the EU, substantial improvements in HFC technology will
continue to unfold, lowering the technology’s capital costs and, to a lesser degree, its operating costs.

3.3.2

Case Studies

3.3.2.1 BC Transit (Whistler, British Columbia)
BC Transit operated a 20-vehicle fleet of fuel-cell-powered buses for transit in the skiing and tourist
community of Whistler for 36 months between 2010 and 2013. The buses used Ballard’s PEM fuel cells and
were hybridized with lithium phosphate batteries69. The concept was to showcase fuel cell technology for
the 2010 Winter Olympics. The buses were well-accepted by the public, drivers, maintainers, and the local
community. The project was delivered on-time and on-budget. The buses travelled more than 4 million km
over their 4 years of operation, operating up to 22 hours per day in temperatures ranging from -20 to
+34.7°C. Over 590 tonnes of hydrogen were dispensed in over 23,000 fills without any safety incidents. An
average of 15.7 kg of hydrogen was used for each 100 km of travel, displacing 52.5 litres (L) of diesel fuel,
and avoiding emissions of almost 6,000 tonnes of CO2. There were no intrinsic problems with the fuel cells,
and all but two of the 22 fuel cell power packs exceeded 8,000 hours of operation.
Now, this was something of a pioneering deployment of fuel cells to power buses, and it proved to be
an excellent learning opportunity, which was carefully analyzed by the U.S. National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL) for the Californian Air Resources Board70. This showed the need for welldirected integration of the various components (for example, integrating the fuel cell with its
compressed air supply, or adapting the suspension to a different distribution of weights). With the

69 Lithium phosphate batteries belong to the LIB family. They use lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4) instead of the more usual lithium cobalt
oxide (LiCoO2) as the cathode material. LiPO4 gives longer life and faster charge and discharge rates, but a somewhat lower energy density
than LiCoO2.
70 Eudy, L., and M. Post, M. 2014. BC Transit Fuel Cell Bus Project Evaluation Results: Second Report. Technical Report NREL/TP-5400-62317.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. September.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

62

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

wisdom of hindsight, it became clear that staff should have advanced training for different types of
maintenance, and that distinctively different spare parts needed to be stocked.

3.3.2.2 Independent Electricity System Operator Power-to-Gas
(Markham, Ontario)
Until about the middle of the 20th Century, “town gas” for heating was usually generated from coal.
Town gas was a mixture of about equal quantities of hydrogen and carbon monoxide (CO). It had the
serious disadvantage of CO’s toxicity and has, today, almost completely been displaced by natural gas.
However, hydrogen—the other component of town gas—is not toxic and is poised to re-enter the gasfor-heat application. In the middle of 2015, the IESO procured a 2-megawatt (MW) power-to-gas (PtG)
project to demonstrate the ability of hydrogen to provide grid services in Ontario71. The selected
respondents (Hydrogenics and Enbridge Gas) will produce hydrogen from the 2 MW of electricity from
the grid using the water electrolysis technology and then inject the gas into the natural gas pipeline
owned and operated by Enbridge Gas. The PtG facility located north of Toronto will start operating in
the next few months, providing the expected benefits to the grid by converting surplus electricity.

3.3.2.3 Canadian Tire Warehouse (Brampton, Ontario)
Forklifts are early adopters of fuel cell technology. Using internal combustion engines to power vehicles
in large, enclosed, populated spaces presents the challenge of providing adequate ventilation. Very
large, modern distribution centres rely on extensive use of forklifts, and Canadian Tire Corporation
(CTC) was a leader in turning to HFC to power their forklift fleet in their Brampton warehouse.
The traditional approach for forklifts has been to use a battery-electric drive using lead-acid batteries.
These have four disadvantages:
1. Recharging the batteries is slow, so the system relies on change-out at a recharge station. This is
slow and cumbersome.
2. Lead-acid batteries deliver a declining voltage as their charge level falls. This leads to a trend of
noticeably slowing performance during a shift.
3. The batteries are heavy.
4. Batteries need to be replaced every 2 to 3 years.
Rather than moving to newer types of batteries, the emerging consensus is to turn to HFCs. For their
Brampton, Ontario centre, CTC uses onsite alkaline fuel cells to produce their hydrogen with grid
electricity. The hydrogen then used in PEM fuel cells on the forklifts. The major advantages of the
system are fast refuelling and higher asset utilization.
The implementation of HFC forklifts at Brampton has been so successful that CTC is now equipping a
new distribution centre in Bolton, Ontario with them.

3.3.2.4 Walmart Canada Fuel Cell Forklift Fleet
Walmart’s entire fleet of material handling equipment (MHE) at the Walmart Perishable Distribution
Centre (PDC) in Alberta is now powered by HFCs72. Walmart decided to incorporate HFC forklifts and
palette trucks in the PDC facility after the successful 4-month trial of fuel cell forklifts at two distribution
71 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016c. IESO Report: Energy Storage. March. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/-/media/files/ieso/document-library/energy-storage/ieso-energy-storage-report_march-2016.pdf
72 Canadian Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Association (CHFCA). 2016. Case Study - Walmart Canada Fuel Cell Forklift Fleet. Accessed October
2017. http://www.chfca.ca/say-h2i/materials-handling/walmart-canada-fuel-cell-forklift-fleet.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

63

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

centres. This trial achieved a 3.5 percent increase in productivity over comparable battery-powered
forklifts.
The forklifts are using hydrogen produced by Air Liquide from 98 percent hydro power, and fuel cells
from Ballard. The Canadian Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Association predicted that this technology is
delivering a $2 million reduction in operating costs (projected over a 7-year period) and contributing
to a reduction of 530 tonnes of CO2 per year.

3.3.2.5 Raglan Mine Energy Storage (Nunavik, Québec)
Glencore’s Raglan Mine is located in the extreme northern part of Québec in the Nunavik region. As
well as being an exceptionally low-cost producer of nickel, the mine coproduces copper and cobalt,
and some precious metals. The reserve will support indefinite operation.
Because of its remote, harsh, far-northern location, the mine is aiming for as much self-sufficiency as
possible. One approach they have adopted is to harness wind energy, an abundant but unpredictable
resource. Tugliq Energy Company was engaged to build and operate a system based on a 3-MW
wind turbine to provide primary production of electricity, and then convert that to hydrogen by
electrolysis. The 200-kW PEM fuel cell assembly can supply up to 20 hours of the mine’s electrical
load. Potentially, hydrogen could also be supplied to fuel underground mine vehicles.
In 3 years of operation (since August 2014), Tugliq has avoided consumption of 6 million litres of
diesel fuel. Even allowing for very good wind availability in the Arctic, this is indicative of the system
achieving a high-capacity factor over what is a comparatively short operating lifetime to date73.
Unlike batteries, modern fuel cells are insensitive to low-temperature operation: Hydrogenics firstever fuel cell was deployed in Antarctica. So, while a BEV struggles to meet the heating demands of
even southern Canada in winter, the integrated system at Raglan with its fuel cell stack easily
accommodates winter temperatures that average around -20°C for 4 months of the year and
delivered 97.8 percent availability in its first 20 months of operation, including two winters.
Having demonstrated reliability and robustness to meet the risk profile of mining companies like
Glencore, their experience as educated buyers and operators provides the assurance for applicability
to community-sized deployments in remote areas of Canada’s North, as well as in less harsh
environments.

3.3.2.6 Fuel Cells used in Maritime Applications
In 2017, the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) Fuel Cell Technologies Office in the Office of Energy
Efficiency & Renewable Energy released a report74 detailing the results of a maritime fuel cell
generator project. This project was intended to:


Demonstrate an HFC power generator for marine applications



Verify increased energy efficiency at part loads and reduced emissions



Identify areas requiring further research

73 Tugliq Energy Co, www.tugliq.com
74 Office of Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy. 2017. DOE Shows Fuel Cells Used in Maritime Applications Can Increase Efficiency by 30
percent. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Energy. July 21. Accessed October 2017. energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/articles/doe-shows-fuelcells-used-maritime-applications-can-increase-efficiency-30.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

64

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT



Analyze the business case



Address regulatory and other market barriers

A 100-kW generator with 72 kg of hydrogen storage was designed and built by Hydrogenics, with
safety and regulatory reviews by the Hydrogen Safety Panel, U.S. Coast Guard, and the American
Bureau of Shipping. The project showed that it is possible to increase energy efficiency by up to
30 percent at part load, and reduce emissions to zero through the use of HFCs.
In a 2016 review paper, van Briet et al.75 note that, because fuel cells are modular in nature and the
intrinsic performance of a single cell is not different from a large stack, ships can benefit from
distributing units throughout the ship without a penalty of increased fuel consumption, reducing
electricity transport losses, and improving redundancy. Furthermore, fuel cell systems are noted for
being well-suited to fluctuating shipboard demands, since they have good part load characteristics.
Very recently, the luxury cruise line Viking announced that their next ocean-going ship will depend
entirely on HFCs for its 62.4-MW power system. Unlike the system envisaged by van Briet et al., which
would produce hydrogen onboard by reforming a liquid fuel, Viking intends to supply their ships with
LH2.

3.3.2.7 Qingdao Light Rail Transit (Shandong Province, China)
In 2015, Ballard signed a joint development and supply agreement to develop and commercialize a
fuel cell engine specifically designed for integration into low floor trams manufactured by CRRC
Qingdao Sifang Company, Ltd. (CRRC Sifang), a Chinese rolling stock manufacturer. The agreements
included 2016 delivery of 10 customized FCvelocity modules, and the agreements have an initial
value expected to be approximately $6 million.
For this customer’s requirements, Ballard developed a new prototype configuration of their FCvelocity
fuel cell module to deliver 200 kW of net power for use in powering trams in urban deployments.
Ballard shipped five of these 200-kW modules to CRRC Sifang in 2017, and these will be used in the
world’s first fully commercial service of fuel-cell-powered trams in Foshan starting in 2018. This
hydrogen-powered tram will run in Foshan in southeastern China. A 17.4-km track will be built in two
phases at 760 million yuan ($140.0 million) with 20 stations. Construction began in February 201776.
This is an Asian first, as China will deliver new hydrogen light rail service in the region. A
demonstration model of the trains was first rolled out in Qingdao in 2015.

3.3.2.8 Canadian Fuel-Cell Buses in China
In 2015 June, Ballard received an order for fuel cell modules for 33 buses in the cities of Yunfu,
(Guangdong) and Rugao (Jiangsu), and 3 months later, for another 300 buses. This has just been the
beginning and Zhongshan and Broad-Ocean Motor Co., Ballard’s biggest shareholder, who are now
building three factories in China to make fuel-cell modules for vehicles using Ballard technology.
Hydrogenics is also active in China, with an order to supply 1,000 fuel cell units for buses to Blue-G.
Beside being a potentially huge market, the Chinese commitment to reducing GHG emissions is
reinforced by the need to reduce local air pollution. As with many other new technologies, one can
75 van Biert, L., M. Godjevac, K. Visser, and A. Purushothaman Vellayani. 2016 “A Review of Fuel Cell Systems for Maritime Applications.”
Journal of Power Sources. 327, pp. 345-364.
76 Smartrailworld.com. 2017. An Asian first as China will deliver new hydrogen light rail service. March 12. Accessed October 2017.
https://www.smartrailworld.com/an-asian-first-as-china-will-deliver-the-first-hydrogen-train
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

65

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

expect China to master fuel-cell-bus technology rapidly and then to deploy their experience on the
export market. In choosing to partner with local companies, the technically advanced Canadian fuelcell manufacturers appear to have recognized the value of this collaboration for entry to a major,
global vehicle market.

3.3.2.9 Vattenfall Fuelling Station (Germany)
In partnership with Shell, the Vattenfall electricity company has operated a fuelling station in Hamburg
since 2012 to supply cars and buses with 350-bar hydrogen (subsequently augmented with 700-bar
capability). Half of its hydrogen is produced onsite by electrolysis; the remainder is shipped in77. So
far, the station’s customers are largely city buses. While car refuelling service is available, there has
been little implementation in Germany so far. However, the experience in southern California shows
that HFC car ownership expands rapidly after a reasonably dense network of fuelling points is
available, and the German situation is about to change with H2 Mobility planning to open 400 stations
there by 2023.

3.3.2.10 Alstom Coradia iLint (Lower Saxony, Germany)
Germany’s first hydrogen-fuelled commuter train, with PEM cells from Hydrogenics, has been
undergoing track trials since early in 2017 and will enter service before the end of the year. Alstom’s
Coradia iLint is based on a diesel Coradia Lint antecedent, with the iLint replacing the diesel traction
with fuel cell technology. It has a sustainable train performance, matching that of regular regional
trains, running at 140 kilometres per hour (kph), with a 600 to 800 km per tankful autonomy, and
accommodating up to 300 passengers. Like almost all fuel-cell-powered vehicles, it is a hybrid, using
LIBs for regenerative braking and initial acceleration.
Quoting from a New York Times story78,
“…about 40 percent of Germany’s rail network is not electrified. And Alstom executives
say that it would be cheaper to replace the diesel-powered trains with hydrogen
vehicles than to string electric lines along the tracks.
“Alstom says it has preliminary orders for 50 to 60 trains from German regional
authorities. A commuter line like this one looks well-suited to hydrogen. The company
can build a fuel supply system in a safe place like a rail yard of its choosing.”

77 Fuel Cell and Hydrogen (FCH). 2016. “Hamburg's Hydrogen Buses and New Refuelling Station.” Clean Hydrogen in European Cities
Newsletter. January 13. Accessed October 2017. http://chic-project.eu/newsletters/draft-chic-newsletter-122011/infrastructuredevelopment-draft-chic-newsletter-122011/hamburgs-hydrogen-buses-in-operation
78 Reed, Stanley. 2017. “Hamburg Is Ready to Fill Up With Hydrogen. Customers Aren’t So Sure.” Business Day. New York Times. July 4.
Accessed October 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/04/business/hydrogen-cars-trains-planes-hamburg.html
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

66

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4

Hydrail Assessment

The objective of Part 4 is to provide a holistic view of the Hydrail System and how it can be taken
forward. The sections in this part provide insights into Hydrail’s:


Required system design



Operational requirements and capacity



Capital and operating costs



Environmental implications



Requirements in relation to regulations



Socio-economic implications



Public acceptability



Implementation readiness



Procurement strategy



Transition plan



Risks and opportunities that will need to be managed if the Hydrail System is implemented

The sections also provide a comparison of the Hydrail System with conventional overhead
electrification so that the reader can understand the comparative benefits and dis-benefits between
the two systems.

4.1

Hydrail System Design

Based on the above this section identifies the technology choices that are available for the
configuration of the Hydrail System.
It does this by assessing the hydrogen technology options identified in Part 3 to the required
functionality of the Hydrail System at the level of its sub-systems.
The output of this section are the parameters that are included in the Operational Simulation model
described in section 4.2.
The Hydrail System design entails the integration of various hydrogen component subsystems with
various technologies that are existing in the market for both off-the-shelf purchase or as custom order
items. The Hydrail System envisioned for the GO network would comprise the seven subsystems
shown on Figure 4-1. It includes, from the GO service end:
1. Hydrogen vehicle
2. Hydrogen dispensing
3. Hydrogen refuelling
4. Hydrogen distribution
5. Hydrogen storage
6. Hydrogen production
7. Electricity supply
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

67

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The components that would form the integrated hydrogen rail system in Ontario are:
FIGURE 4-1 HYDRAIL SYSTEM COMPONENTS

With the Hydrail System the subsystems of the vehicle, dispensing, refuelling, distribution, and
storage share common characteristics with the current diesel-based system. However, unlike diesel,
the scope of the Hydrail System includes the process of fuel production. A benefit of this is that the
fuel price should be less variable than diesel as it brings into the control of Metrolinx one of the
market externalities that currently affects it.

4.1.1

Key Components Overview

Each of the subsystems within Hydrail, from hydrogen production to dispensing, is modular, to meet
the evolving requirements of GO rail corridor. For example, the hydrogen storage can be built to
meet the initial needs of an enhanced RER service on a given corridor and could then be expanded as
the train service on the corridor grows over the future years. In relation to the hydrogen production
subsystem, there are two options for where these can be located:
1. At a distance from the GO network
2. Onsite: located fairly close to refuelling facilities
The first option could be a single, central facility or several locations convenient to refuelling points.
The second option would be at as many locations as there are refuelling points. Due to modularity,
dispersing electrolysis has little effect on total costs for either option.
The decision as to which of the above options is preferred, will depend on the specific nature of each
corridor and the decision criteria will include: availability and cost of land, electrical grid accessibility
and any zoning restrictions.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

68

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.1.2

Electricity Supply Subsystem

The end-to-end Hydrail System begins with the supply of electricity to make hydrogen through water
electrolysis technology. The Ontario electrical grid (as discussed in Section 3.2.3.1) is predominantly
carbon-free with various supply options, as shown on Figure 4-2, from nuclear, to hydro-electric, to
solar, and wind, with natural gas providing the peak-demand service. So, hydrogen production using
surplus electricity results in over 80 percent GHG reduction for the GO system.
The grid is primarily made up of the following components categorized as generators, consumers,
and grid services (as implied in the layout on Figure 4-2). Depending on the price of electricity, as well
as capacity for hydrogen storage, electricity is drawn from the Ontario grid and converted into
hydrogen by water electrolysis, mainly at times of grid oversupply and low value for electricity in the
market. Occasionally, when the hydrogen capacity is too low in the fuel inventory, electricity at higher
prices is used—governed by the imperative of always meeting the GO network’s requirement for
hydrogen.
FIGURE 4-2 ELECTRICAL SUPPLY SYSTEM

The parameters in Table 4-1 were used to design the electricity supply subsystem for the Hydrail
System and support its operation in the long term.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

69

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-1 ELECTRICITY SUPPLY SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter

Description

Significance

Impact

Electricity price
($/MWh)

HOEP represents the electricity
market price determined an hour
ahead of time, giving enough
response time for the hydrogen
production equipment to react

High, varies every hour and is tied to
the surplus electricity in providing
potential cost-savings when
producing hydrogen during periods
of lower priced electricity

Operating cost

Electricity required
(GWh/d)

Total amount of electricity required
by the Hydrail System per day

High, represents a significant amount
of electricity consumption for one
application in the province

Operating cost

Surplus electricity
supply (GWh)

Excess electricity that is generated
but never used due to lack of
demand at certain times of day

High, determines the lower priced
electricity at certain times of day and
could change in the future,
depending on the increase or
decrease in demand for electricity and
supply capacity

Operating cost

Future demand
(GWh)

Apart from demand arising in
other sectors, electricity for other
modes of transportation (e.g.,
electric vehicles) could take
advantage of the surplus
electricity, so the demand for
surplus could increase

Medium, reduces the available
surplus electricity; however, the
amount of surplus existing now and in
the future79 would be sufficient to
keep Hydrail operating costs lower

Operating cost

Notes:
$/MWh = dollar per megawatt-hour
GWh = gigawatt-hour
GWh/d = gigawatt-hour per day
HOEP = Hourly Ontario Electricity Price

4.1.3

Hydrogen Production Subsystem

The key elements of the water electrolyzer-based hydrogen production subsystem are shown on
Figure 4-3. The electrolyzer stack converts water into hydrogen and oxygen, and all the other
components are support equipment to make this conversion happen. The electrolyzers are made up
of four primary components:
1. Feed water system
2. Electrolyzer stack
3. Cooling and drying systems
4. Power electronics (or power management)
The components except the stack are jointly called the balance of plant (BOP). The stack is at the core
of the hydrogen production subsystem shown on Figure 4-3 made up of several electrolysis cells
stacked together. The stack is held together using mechanical compression either through bolt-nut
79 Market Intelligence and Data Analysis Corporation (MIDAC) and NextHydrogen. 2016.
Grid Integrated Electrolysis – Facilitating Carbon Emission Reductions in the Transportation, Industrial and Residential Sectors. October 31.
Accessed October 2017. https://tinyurl.com/ybptfola
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

70

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

clamping with appropriate torque applied to the individual bolts or through other means at the time
of manufacture. Hydrogen produced by the electrolyzer is in gaseous phase and is sent to the
hydrogen storage subsystem for further compression or liquefaction, depending on the option
chosen for the distribution and fuelling systems onboard the rail vehicle.
FIGURE 4-3 HYDROGEN PRODUCTION SUBSYSTEM

The parameters in Table 4-2 were used to design the hydrogen production subsystem for the Hydrail
System to support long-term investment and operations.
TABLE 4-2 HYDROGEN PRODUCTION SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter

Description

Significance

Impacts

A major cost component within the
Hydrail System that is reducing with
improvements in design, materials,
and construction

High, there are numerous modules of
electrolyzer stacks needed to
produce the required hydrogen for
the Hydrail System. This cost is
declining with improvements in
design and growing numbers being
produced.

Capital cost

Electrolyzer
efficiency (kWh/kg)

The deviation from theoretical
efficiency (33 kWh/kg), the energy
required to produce 1 kg of hydrogen,
or the electrical conversion efficiency

High, affects the amount of electricity
required to produce hydrogen, so
needs to be as low and close to the
theoretical efficiency as possible

Operating cost

Electrolyzer current
density

The electrical current across the active
area of each electrolysis cell within the
electrolyzer stack

Medium, manufacturers have
enabled a wide range of operational
current densities that can be used
depending on the electricity price.
Power consumption per unit of
hydrogen produced increases with
rising current density.

Operating cost

Since the Hydrail System would only
produce hydrogen at times of lower
electricity prices, the number of
electrolyzer stacks needed increases
by that much

High, determines the increase in
capital cost of the Hydrail System in
additional electrolyzer stacks needed
to produce the required hydrogen

Capital and
operating costs

Electrolyzer cost
($/kWe)

(A/cm2)
Range: 2 to 5

Hydrogen
production size
(number)

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

71

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-2 HYDROGEN PRODUCTION SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter
Refurbishment
lifetime (hours)
Range: 40000 to
100,000

Refurbishment cost
factor
(% of initial capital
cost)
Range: 30 to 60
Land cost factor
2

($/m )

Description

Significance

Impacts

Specified as hours of operation
instead of years, since the electrolyzer
will not be operated uninterruptedly
to use lower priced electricity periods;
it is lower for PEM than for alkaline
electrolyzers

Medium, when the performance of
the electrolyzer degrades to the point
that it impacts its electricity
consumption, it needs to be
refurbished; operation at higher
current densities reduces the lifetime

Maintenance;
replacement cost

Electrolyzer stacks are refurbished
when they reach the end of their
lifetime, where the components, such
as metal plates and other components
in the BOP, are retained if quality is
intact

Medium, impacts the lifetime cost of
the project, such that there is some
savings in the long-term

Maintenance;
replacement cost

The size of each electrolyzer stack
determines the total land area
required for the Hydrail System and
the relevant cost of land

Low, the cost of land should not be
significant, even within the GHTA

Capital cost of
Hydrail System

Notes:
$/kWe = dollar per kilowatt equivalent

GHTA = Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area

$/m2 = dollar per square metre

kg = kilogram

percent = percent

kWh/kg = kilowatt-hour per kilogram

A/cm2 = amperes per square centimetre

PEM = proton‐exchange membrane

The inefficiency in the electrolyzers would result in heat generation from the stacks, so they have to be
cooled to maintain the operating temperature at about 60 degrees Celsius (ºC). Usually, they are air
cooled for smaller stacks, but for larger stack sizes or a combination of many smaller stacks, cooling
water circulation with significant amount of cooling water would be required. To minimize the water
usage, a cooling tower might be required. The current assessment estimated the amount of makeup
water that would be needed by the cooling tower and is included in the assessment of the total
amount of water required by the Hydrail System.

4.1.3.1 Operational Characteristics: Current Density and Cheap Electricity
The current density is a flexible operational parameter inherent to water electrolyzers that supports
the operating economics of hydrogen generation for the Hydrail System. The performance curve in
Figure 4-4 suggests the range of flexibility available to take advantage of the lower price of electricity
at certain periods in a day within the Ontario electrical grid.
The curve in Figure 4-4 shows the power consumption to produce one cubic metre of hydrogen by
Hydrogenic’s PEM electrolyzers. Higher current density is less energy-efficient but concentrating
hydrogen production at times of low electricity price can still be cost-efficient and using higher
current densities at times of low electricity cost also reduces the capital cost of electrolysis cells.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

72

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-4 PEM WATER ELECTROLYZER PERFORMANCE80

4.1.3.2 Proton-exchange Membrane (PEM) and Alkaline Electrolyzers
As mentioned in Section 3.2.4 there are two types of water electrolyzers that are considered as part of
the hydrogen production subsystem: a PEM electrolyzer and an alkaline electrolyzer. There are
advantages and disadvantages between the two when compared, as listed in Table 4-3.
TABLE 4-3 PROTON-EXCHANGE MEMBRANE AND ALKALINE WATER ELECTROLYZER COMPARISON
No.

Parameter

PEM Water Electrolyzer

Alkaline Water Electrolyzer

1

Electrolyzer
efficiency

Higher: 60-70 percent achievable, so results in
relatively lower operating cost

Lower: 50-55 percent achievable, so
results in relatively higher operating cost

2

Capital cost

Lower: 500-800 $/kWe

Higher: 700-900 $/kWe

3

Single stack size

Up to 3 MW

Up to 10 MW

4

Gas outlet pressure

Up to 3 MPa without compression

Up to 1 MPa without compression

5

Electrolyte
maintenance

Offline, after deterioration, which might impact
operations when the electrolyte needs
replacement as part of the stack refurbishment
phase

Online, during regular operation, so the
stack can remain intact indefinitely,
improving lifetime of operation

6

Lifetime

Lower: 50,000 hours of continuous operation

Higher: 100,000 hours of continuous
operation

7

Gas loss for drying

None

3.5 percent of the produced gas

8

Technology maturity
and deployment

Developed, yet to be established; deployed at
small-scale

Established; deployed for large-scale
application

9

Ideal application

Small- to large-scale production: Single stack
size currently available up to 3 MW

Large-scale production: Single stack size
currently available up to 10 MW

Notes:
MPa = megapascal
MW = megawatt

80 Hydrogenics Inc., email dated 2017 August 23 from Joe Cargnelli
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

73

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The higher electrolyzer efficiency of PEM would have up to 15 percent reduction in operating cost
compared to the alkaline electrolyzers. Until the efficiency of the alkaline electrolyzer is improved to
match that of the PEM, for Hydrail-type systems, the PEM looks more attractive from an operating cost
perspective. The impact from the larger stack size, longer lifetime, and economy of scale is yet to be
assessed for the two types of electrolyzers. The larger stack size, for example, when using alkaline
electrolyzers, is attractive for central or combined production scenarios. There could be one
production facility for a combination of more than one or two GO rail corridors, requiring a larger
number of electrolyzers in one given location, so the alkaline electrolyzers could prove economic
benefits based on the initial and replacement capital costs.
In terms of making a recommendation on these two technologies for use within the Hydrail System, it
is too early, as there are unknowns (listed as follows) that make the decision difficult at this time:


The number of central or combined locations for production



If it is onsite production, the installed capacity requirement



Transition plan for the Hydrail System – all corridors or one at a time, as this would also impact the
decision on large-scale central production or small-scale onsite production



Operational characteristics of the individual production centres at each location

4.1.4

Hydrogen Storage Subsystem

The hydrogen storage subsystem is expected to be part of the production system or sited right next
to the production system, as a temporary or transition storage system to manage the large volume of
gas that would be needed by the Hydrail System. The key equipment within the hydrogen storage
subsystem is shown on Figure 4-5 for both liquid and gas phases. The common equipment for either
phase includes:


Compressor



Flow controllers



Regulators



Sensors



Tanks



Control system that distributes and manages electrical power



Control signals to all the relevant equipment within the storage system

The liquid phase, in addition, would have a refrigeration plant as part of the liquefaction plant to cool
the hydrogen to about -253°C; at which point, hydrogen becomes a liquid.
The gaseous hydrogen produced by the electrolyzers needs to be stored until it is required by the
refuelling system. The amount of storage is dictated by the amount of electrolysis described earlier, to
take advantage of the lower market price of electricity in the Ontario grid.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

74

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-5 HYDROGEN STORAGE SUBSYSTEM

The parameters in Table 4-4 helped to design the hydrogen storage system for the Hydrail System to
support its long-term investment and operations.
TABLE 4-4 HYDROGEN STORAGE SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter

Description

Feed gas pressure
(MPa)

Pressure of the gas that the storage
system receives; the H2 outlet pressure
from the production system

Medium, dictates the additional
compression that may be required
when storing as compressed gas

Operating cost

Pressure at which the gaseous
hydrogen could be stored temporarily
before it is dispatched to the refuelling
system; the pressure is chosen based
on tank materials and related costs

High, designed to be at relatively
lower pressures, such that low-cost
carbon steel tanks could be used,
although the lower pressure could
increase the number of tanks needed
to store the same volume of gas

Capital cost

Duration of storage to support the
varied production schedule. Larger
capacity allows for greater access to
lower-cost electricity

Medium, larger duration helps in
using lower-cost electricity. But the
space in the storage location might
not be supporting the additional tanks
needed to support the longer
duration.

Capital cost

Cost of the storage tank, including the
support structures to estimate the tank
portion of the total capital cost of the
storage system based on the total
volume of gas that needs storage

High, dictates the type and storage
pressure for gaseous hydrogen; there
is a coherent relationship between the
cost, tank material, and pressure

Capital cost

Range: 3 to 10
Storage pressure
(MPa)
Range: 10 to 20

Storage duration
(hours)
Range 24 to 96

Storage tank cost
factor ($/kg)

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

Significance

75

Impacts

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-4 HYDROGEN STORAGE SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter

Description

Significance

Impacts

Storage phase,
CGH2

One of the phases hydrogen could be
stored in; the gaseous phase is
well-understood and characterized in
the industry, and is a known
automobile fuel when it comes to
hydrogen applications

Medium, initiates a series of design
aspects throughout the Hydrail
System, starting from the stationary
storage to the vehicle onboard
storage

System
configuration,
energy
requirements,
operating cost

Storage phase, LH2

This is one of the phases in which
hydrogen could be stored. Liquid
phase storage is well understood and
characterized in the industry, but it is
less characterized as a fuel onboard
the vehicle

High, liquid hydrogen requires
additional processing of the gaseous
hydrogen that comes from the
production system, so it is energy
intensive

Operating and
capital costs

Tank storage
volume

This refers to the design volume of
storage per tank, used to determine
the total number of tanks required to
store the available H2 from the
production system as per the design

Medium, impacts the system cost and
the commissioning of the storage
system, especially if the land area
available is limited or if the land is very
expensive; would trigger the design of
multilevel stacking of tanks on top of
each other to reduce the overall
footprint

Capital and real
estate costs

Land cost factor
($/m2)

This is the factor that determines the
total cost of land that is required by the
storage system based on the location.

Low, unless located in urban areas
with high land costs; it would have less
impact on costs if it is in the ROW

Capital cost

Compressor plant
cost

This is the capital cost of H2
compressor, estimated based on the
pressure required and the volume of
gas to be compressed

Medium, could become expensive if
the volume of gas or the design
pressure of the tanks is increased

Capital cost

This is the capital cost of liquefying the
H2 from the production system for
storage, estimated based on the
cooling energy required

High, increases with the volume of gas
to be stored, and the operation of this
plant requires additional electrical
energy, which would impact operating
cost, so is tied to the electricity market
price discussed earlier

Capital cost

This is the lifetime of the material of the
storage tanks, and is impacted by the
number of fills (or charge cycle) and
the material of the tank construction

Medium, would change if the dynamic
loading of the tanks changes (i.e., if
there is an increase in the number of
fills beyond the intended daily
requirement)

Replacement
cost

(m3)

($M)
Liquefaction plant
cost
($M)

Lifetime (years)
Range: 15 to 20

Notes:
$M = dollars (millions)
LH2 = liquid hydrogen
m3 = cubic metre
ROW = right-of-way

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

76

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.1.4.1 Gaseous and Liquid Phases of Hydrogen
Liquid phase storage tanks are much different from gas phase storage tanks, and fewer liquid tanks
would be required for the same amount of gas. The choice between liquid phase and gaseous phase
storage is based on several factors, although from our assessment, the liquid phase one does not
seem viable for the proposed Hydrail System. The suppliers of merchant hydrogen are attuned to
moving relatively small quantities of hydrogen as liquid (LH2). However, on the larger scale of the
proposed RER Hydrail System, there are substantial reasons for operating purely with CGH2, as
follows:


Energy Input: To include LH2 as part of the Hydrail System, energy usage is increased by
10 percent, and energy cost is increased by 20 percent because—unlike electrolysis—the
liquefaction process is not readily interruptible and cannot focus on periods of low-cost grid
values.



Capital Cost: The cost of a liquefaction plant for the entire RER system is estimated at $160 million
This adds complexity to the supply chain and, with no evident substantial cost offsets, this is an
additional cost.



Distribution Cost: Centralization of LH2 would be preferred on economic grounds—the capital cost
of liquefaction plants does not scale well. That leads to a need for extensive distribution, and LH2
precludes gas distribution by pipeline. Admittedly, pipeline distribution may encounter some
public resistance, but is likely to be practicable. Trucking is cheaper with liquid than with gas, but
either, for almost any distance, is much more expensive than pipelining.



Problems with Solid Oxygen: Hydrogen needs extreme purification from oxygen before
liquefaction. Purification can be arranged, but it is a particularly significant issue with
electrolytically produced H2 with its inevitable initial oxygen content. This is much less of an issue
with steam-methane reforming (SMR) H2, which is generally oxygen-free. Traces of oxygen present
in hydrogen liquefaction can accumulate in lines and tanks as solid oxygen, and can lead to violent
detonation.



Accident Scenarios: In the event of a spill, LH2 does not disperse nearly as readily or quickly as H2
gas. This increases fire risks.



Hydrogen Losses: Design can curtail but will not eliminate H2 losses from boil-off within the entire
production and consumption chain, thereby increasing the operating cost.



Extra Handling Risk: While fast vehicle-fill times could be easier with LH2, it is considered more
prone to accidents than fuelling using the well-established technology for fuelling with CGH2.
Overall, LH2 is a much less familiar fuel than CGH2.

4.1.4.2 Storage Tank Characteristics
There is significant difference in the storage tank design in terms of materials, construction, and
capital costs. The design is primarily driven by the storage pressure requirements. For the transition
storage system, lower-pressure storage would save significant capital costs, as the volume of storage
is at least three times larger than the upcoming refuelling storage system. There are at least two
distinct types of tanks worth comparing (as summarized in Table 4-5) to provide a basis for the storage
system design.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

77

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-5 COMPARISON OF STEEL AND CARBON-FIBRE GAS STORAGE TANKS
No.

Parameter

Steel or Metal Tanks

Carbon-fibre Tanks

1

Storage pressure

From 0.1 to 20 MPa

From 10 to 100 MPa

2

Manufacturing process

Established, rolled steel and welded end
covers

Established, carbon-fibre wound on steel
liner with or without fibre-glass
reinforcement

3

Supply chain

Many local manufacturers available

Few; no local manufacturers available

4

Raw material

Carbon, stainless, or alloy steel

Carbon fibre, steel liner, fibre-glass

5

Cost

Lowest possible, due to low cost raw
materials

Currently higher than steel tanks due to
material costs

6

Impact of storage
pressure

Wall thickness increases, and diameter
decreases as dictated by the pressure
limit

Wall thickness increases, and volume of
individual tanks decreases; thereby,
increasing the total number of tanks
needed

7

Lifetime

10 years

20 years

8

Risks from hydrogen

Embrittlement over the lifetime of the tank

The refill cycle impacts the stress
retained by the fibres

4.1.5

Hydrogen Distribution Subsystem

The hydrogen distribution subsystem connects the storage system with the refuelling system, and it
differs based on gas or liquid phases of hydrogen. For the gas phase, distribution can be by either
pipeline or trucks; but for liquid phase, only trucking is possible for longer distances (beyond
1 kilometre [km] in length). Although for shorter distances (less than 1 km in length), pipeline is
feasible for the liquid phase.
The distribution system comprises the following equipment, shown on Figure 4-6:


Blowers



Pressure regulator and gas distribution



Temperature control



Flow meters, valves, and sensors



Control system that distributes and manages electrical power and control signals to all the
relevant equipment within the respective distribution system

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

78

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-6 HYDROGEN DISTRIBUTION SUBSYSTEM

The parameters in Table 4-6 were used to design the hydrogen distribution subsystem, using a
pipeline solution for the Hydrail System to support its long-term investment and operations. For
gaseous distribution through pipeline, the fibre-reinforced polymer 81 is chosen as the default
material. These are made by coating layers of polymer that has the lowest permeability for hydrogen
on to solid substrate, such as steel or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipes, depending on the gas pressure.
TABLE 4-6 PIPELINE DISTRIBUTION SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter
Operating
pressure (MPa)

Description

Significance

Pressure at which the pipeline can
safely operate

Medium, dictates the material and
dimensions needed for the pipeline
design and construction, so higher
pressures would lead to expensive
construction

Capital cost

Total length of the pipeline per GO rail
corridor and the Hydrail System

High, currently specified as the total
length of the GO rail network, not
knowing exactly where the production
and storage facilities would be
located; any increase in length would
increase costs

Capital,
operating, and
maintenance
costs

Internal diameter of the pipeline
determined by the operating pressure
and the volume of gas that needs to be
transported

Low, with respect to the capital cost;
the gas pressure drop varies with the
diameter and the length of the
pipeline

Capital cost

Range: 2 to 10

Pipeline length
(km)

Size, internal
diameter (m)
Range: 0.1 to 0.0

Impacts

81 U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). 2008. "Section iii.E.3, Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Pipelines for Hydrogen Delivery." FY 2007 Annual
Progress Report, DOE Hydrogen Program. Accessed October 2017. https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/progress07/iii_e_3_smith.pdf
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

79

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-6 PIPELINE DISTRIBUTION SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter
Capital cost factor
($/km)

Lifetime
(years)

Description

Significance

Impacts

Determines the capital cost of the
pipeline based on the length of the
pipeline infrastructure

High, might become a significant
portion of the Hydrail infrastructure if
the pipeline length is substantial for a
scenario where the production and
storage are far away from the GO rail
network

Capital cost

This is the lifetime of the pipeline
material that allows continuous
operation without impacting reliability

Medium, usually approximately 10 or
more years, but other factors could
impact this, especially the gas
pressure, and implementation of
joints and connections

Replacement
cost

Notes:
m = metre

The parameters in Table 4-7 helped to design the hydrogen distribution using road transportation
trucks (tanker-trucks) for the Hydrail System to support its long-term investment and operations. The
trucks are usually managed by the hydrogen supplier, so the cost of trucks would be complicated. For
simplicity, we assume that the trucks would be owned and operated by Metrolinx.
TABLE 4-7 TRUCK-BASED DISTRIBUTION SUBSYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter

Description

Significance to the system

Impacts

Onboard storage
pressure (MPa)

Pressure at which the gas or liquid
hydrogen is stored onboard the truck,
legally allowed for transporting
hydrogen by road

High, determines the type of tank
required, and the volume of gas or
liquid that could be stored, so results
in the cost factor

Capital cost and
Hydrail
operating cost

Storage volume
(kg or m3)

Volume of gas or liquid that could be
stored per truck for transportation

High, determines the number of trips
or number of trucks that are needed
per day to transport hydrogen from
storage to the refuelling system

Hydrail
operating cost
and capital cost

Storage tank cost
factor ($/kg)

Cost for the design, materials,
manufacturing, and testing of the tanks
suitable for use to transport hydrogen
on trucks

High, dictates the cost of the trucks if
owned by the rail operator; if
contracted, this would affect the
operating cost

Capital or
operating cost

Storage phase, gas

Phase at which hydrogen is stored in
the tank onboard the truck

Medium, affects the volume of
hydrogen that could be transported
per truck

Capital cost

Storage phase,
liquid

Phase at which hydrogen is stored in
the tank onboard the truck

Medium, denser than gaseous
hydrogen, so two to four times more
hydrogen could be transported per
truck

Hydrail
operating cost

Lifetime (years)

Lifetime of the tanker truck, including
the tanks onboard

Medium, differs based on the storage
pressure, phase, and number of refill
cycle

Replacement
cost

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

80

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.1.5.1 Pipeline and Truck based Distribution
The distribution of hydrogen would only be required in the case of distributed production or
combined central production for various corridors. The current industry practice for gaseous fuel
distribution is either through pipeline or through tanker-trucks. They are chosen for few specific
reasons based on the parameters listed in Table 4-8.
TABLE 4-8 COMPARISON OF PIPELINE AND TRUCK DISTRIBUTION
No.

Parameter

Pipeline

Tanker-truck

1

Demand for hydrogen

If higher and long-term, pipeline is
cost-effective

If smaller and short-term, trucks are
cost-effective

2

Distance from
production to refuelling

Economic, if shorter (less than 100 km
per corridor)

Economic for longer distances, when
used as a backup supply (or short-term)

3

Accessibility

Could support an entire array of
additional users along the length of the
pipeline by allowing access to tap into
the pipeline for permanent use

Difficult to do this with one truck, as the
pressure drop after each transfer
impacts on the transfer rate

4

Operating pressure

Pipeline has limited operating
pressure, so the compressor power
requirement at the refuelling system
would increase

Trucks could carry up to the pressure
required by the refuelling and
dispensing systems

5

Operational risk

Lower, especially if located along the
ROW of the Ministry of Transportation

Higher, irrespective of the
transportation routes taken

6

Hydrogen phase

Only useful for gaseous phase,
especially for longer distances (>1 km)

Could be used to transport both gas
and liquid phases of hydrogen

7

Initial capital cost

Higher

Lower

Notes:
> = greater than

The pipeline option could be selected if the production and storage systems are within the lengths of
the GO rail corridors to keep the capital costs at a reasonable level. Although the return on
investment would take longer than for trucks, but other advantages, including the higher reliability
and lower operational risk, strengthen the choice for the pipeline option. Additional information on
pipelines is available elsewhere82.
However, the reality of Hydrail implementation would occur in phases over a few years, so the first few
trains could go into service even before the full implementation of the Hydrail infrastructure if the rail
vehicles could be refuelled by trucks every day.
The truck option has another advantage in that it may not require the refuelling and dispensing
systems if the logistics of refuelling each train is planned accordingly. The trucks could be coordinated
to refill a small number of tanks near the dispensing point at higher pressure using a compressor for
the gaseous phase. If the trucks carry liquid hydrogen, they can be transferred to the train directly
without buffer refill storage, provided the train is storing hydrogen onboard as liquid. But in real train
82 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2015. NIST Calculates High Cost of Hydrogen Pipelines, Shows How to Reduce It.
July 20. Accessed October 2017. https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2015/07/nist-calculates-high-cost-hydrogen-pipelines-showshow-reduce-it
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

81

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

operational experience, this arrangement would not work due to increased chances for accidents
(due to many numbers of moving pieces within the refuelling and maintenance facility) and impacts to
the reliability of daily operation.
This scenario of trucks refuelling the trains directly or through a small number of buffer tanks is not
currently considered in this study, as there are unknowns that do not yield sufficient and confident
information to assess the impact. There are two key unknowns: (1) the location of the refuelling
system, and (2) the number of trains that can be refuelled in parallel at these refuelling locations.

4.1.6

Hydrogen Refuelling Subsystem

The hydrogen refuelling subsystem is required to provide enough hydrogen for a full day of GO train
service, so the storage tanks are sized such that they can store up to 24 hours of gas – the volume of
gas required for 1 full day’s service for the RER Scenario 5 train service pattern. These tanks would be
located within the dispensing or refuelling facility where each train gets the required volume of
hydrogen for a full day’s service.
The refuelling system consists of the following equipment, as shown on Figure 4-7:


Compressors in a cascaded arrangement



Pressure regulator and gas distribution



Temperature control



Flow meters, valves, and sensors



Control system that distributes and manages electrical power



Control signals to all relevant equipment within the refuelling system

The temperature control is necessary during transfer of gaseous hydrogen onto refuelling tanks, as
hydrogen could cool down or warm up, depending on the pressures, during transfer from the
distribution system.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

82

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-7 HYDROGEN REFUELLING SUBSYSTEM

The design parameters for the refuelling system are similar to those for the storage system provided
in Table 4-4. The main difference within the refuelling system is for the gaseous phase, which is stored
at a higher-pressure range from 70 to 100 MPa. For the current Hydrail System, refuelling tanks are
designed to store the compressed gas at a pressure of 85 MPa, based on similar experience on
automotive refuelling system design83. This would provide enough pressure to fill the tanks onboard
the rail vehicles, which are designed to be at 70 MPa. The liquid storage is done in the same fashion
as it is done in the storage system.

4.1.7

Hydrogen Dispensing Subsystem

The hydrogen dispensing subsystem comprises the following equipment, shown on Figure 4-8:


Nozzle



Temperature-controlled hose



Cooling system

83 National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). 2014. Hydrogen Station Compression, Storage, and Dispensing Technical Status and
Costs. Independent Review published for the U.S. Department of Energy Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program. Technical Report NREL/BK6A10-58564. Contract No. DE-AC36 08GO28308. May. Accessed October 2014. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/58564.pdf
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

83

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT



Flow meter, valves, and sensors



Control system that distributes and manages electrical power



Control signals to all relevant equipment within the dispensing system

The refrigeration plant is necessary during the transfer of gaseous hydrogen onto the onboard tanks,
as hydrogen warms up during its expansion from the higher pressure at the refuelling tanks into the
lower pressure of the onboard tanks.
For liquid hydrogen transfer between the refuelling tanks to the tank onboard the vehicle, the transfer
lines have to be maintained with good insulation such that the boil-off is minimized.
FIGURE 4-8 HYDROGEN DISPENSING SYSTEM

The parameters in Table 4-9 were used to design the hydrogen dispensing subsystem for the Hydrail
System to support its long-term investment and operations.
TABLE 4-9 HYDROGEN DISPENSING SYSTEM DESIGN PARAMETERS
Parameter

Description

Significance

Flow rate (kg/h)

Flow rate required at the dispenser
such that the tanks onboard the rail
vehicle are filled within a set time by
the operators, usually 15 minutes of fill
time

High, dictates how much hydrogen
can be transferred from the refuelling
tanks into the onboard tanks;
significantly faster flow rates are
required (please read the discussion
after this table)

Operations of
the rail network

Dispensing
pressure (MPa)

Applies mainly to gaseous hydrogen,
usually set higher than the allowed
storage pressure onboard the rail
vehicle, and matches the pressure
delivered from the refuelling system

High, enables faster transfer and
could trigger the requirement for a
booster compressor if the flow rates
