upgraded RER service delivery to various corridors commencing in 2024.
The current procurement timeline is somewhat aggressive, noting significant works to be completed
in the installation of overhead catenaries. These works will also involve significant third party and
public interface, given the need to obtain environmental approvals, relocate utilities, upgrade
bridges, remove trees and obtain property rights. Additionally, there are potentially significant
scheduling risks associated with the installation of overhead catenary wires.
While Hydrail will eliminate the need for the infrastructure works associated with the installation of
overhead catenary wires, additional scheduling risks are presented because hydrogen fuel powered
train sets that meet RER requirements do not currently exist. Based on initial market consultations, it is
however, anticipated that train sets could be designed and delivered within the planned timeline for
RER implementation.

4.10.1.2 Off Corridor Works
The procurement of off-corridor works is ongoing and includes platform construction or upgrades as
well as the acquisition of land to house new stations or facilitate the expansion of, or changes to,
existing stations.
The procurement of off corridor works will be impacted by any changes to train configuration. Such a
change could be required if, for example, it is determined that, due to the need for on-board fuel
storage, there is the need for longer trains, or for the trains’ floors to be at a different height than is
currently the case. In such an event, passenger platforms would have to be adjusted to facilitate safe
boarding of passengers. It is however noted that Metrolinx may have a preference to adjust platform
heights anyway to provide for level boarding.
A decision to pursue Hydrail would also necessitate the construction of hydrogen generation, storage,
transportation and dispensing infrastructure. This will require additional land acquisition and the
design and construction of these facilities. Consideration will also have to be given to operation and
maintenance of these facilities, noting that fuelling infrastructure is not contemplated under current
RER procurement plans. It is noted, as discussed in Section 4.9, that hydrogen generation and storage
facilities at the scale or functionality level required to support the GO network do not currently exist.

4.10.1.3 Rail Vehicle Maintenance Facilities
Rail vehicle maintenance facilities allow for the mechanical maintenance, body repair, the day-to-day
cleaning of trains and operational services such as fuelling and sanding. There is currently one train
maintenance facility, the Willowbrook facility, located in Etobicoke, ON. A second facility, the East Rail
Maintenance Facility, is currently under construction as a design, build, finance, maintain (DBFM)
project, with substantial completion scheduled for December 2017. OnCo is expected to take over
use of the maintenance facilities in 2021.
The maintenance requirements of hydrogen fuelled vehicles will differ from those of electric or diesel
vehicles. A key consideration will be that maintenance facilities for hydrogen fuelled vehicles should
allow for greater levels of ventilation. Other health and safety concerns would have to be addressed,
as appropriate and required. Notwithstanding this, it is anticipated that these concerns can be
addressed without any significant structural changes being required.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

224

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.10.2 Jurisdictional Scan
The following sections provides an overview of recent examples of the deployment of vehicle fleets
fuelled alternative fuels. The examples offer some insight into the commercial considerations of other
jurisdictions as they sought to diversify their fuel mix, in the provision of public transportation services.
Though, with one the exception, these are not examples of hydrogen powered rail, they provide
examples of approaches to the introduction of alternative fuels in public transportation fleets. The risk
profiles associated with these initiatives are therefore, relevant as we examine the commercial
considerations for Hydrail in Ontario.

4.10.2.1 Hydrail Deployment – The German Example
The German government has taken steps to electrify parts of its rail network using HFC technology. As
at March 2017, the German states of Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Baden-Württemberg and
the Hessian transport association ‘Rhein-Main-Verkehrsverbund’185 had signed letters of intent to
purchase a total of 60 trains from Alstom, an integrated rail transport company. While there are
limited public details of the procurement activities to date, in the study conducted to assess the
feasibility of the use of HFC to propel trains in Germany, recommendations were made for the
procurement of services.
The study highlighted the provision of hydrogen infrastructure as a new service component, which
would not have had to be considered with more conventional railway service models. Two options,
integrated or separate procurement of train services and hydrogen infrastructure, were considered.
The models were analyzed within the context of appropriate distribution of risks between the
commissioning authority and the transport and infrastructure companies. Acknowledging that there
was no precedent on which to base an assessment, the models considered were intended to illustrate
the spectrum of conceivable procurement possibilities.
Option 1 - Separate Procurement of Train Services and Hydrogen Infrastructure
Two of the models considered for separate procurement of train services and hydrogen infrastructure
are outlined below.

Conventional Vehicle Procurement
In this model, the provision, maintenance and repair of vehicles as well as the transport service is
undertaken by the rail transport company. The supply of hydrogen is procured separately.
The advantages of the model are that transport services are provided by one integrated company and
there is the generation of service and value chain synergies through the rail transport company, while
the commissioning body profits from market knowledge of the rail transport company. A key
disadvantage is that there are high market entry hurdles, which could preclude small and mediumsized rail transport companies.
Given the higher capital costs, and to facilitate competition, the study suggested that the
commissioning authority consider providing various forms of support to the rail transportation
company, including a reauthorization guarantee, a redeployment guarantee (vehicles), the retention
of interest rate risk, a capital service guarantee, a residual value guarantee, or some combination of
these.

185 “Alstom’s hydrogen train Corodia iLint first successful run at 80 Km/h.” Alstom.com. N.p., 14 Mar. 2017. Web. 01 Oct. 2017.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

225

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Commissioning Authority Vehicle Pool
In this model, the commissioning authority would procure vehicles, separately from the rail transport
company procurement, and maintain them in a pool. Vehicles would then be made available to the
rail transport company, as scheduled, over the concession period.
The key advantage of this model is that the commissioning authority stands to benefit from
economies of scale by ordering trains in larger quantities. The rail transport company also benefits as
the commissioning authority would maintain residual value risk.
The key disadvantage is that the commissioning authority maintains the risks associated with the
vehicles, including technology risk, which is more significant in the case of HFC-powered trains.
Further to this, the commissioning authority does not benefit from the experience of the rail transport
company in the procurement of the trains.
Option 2 - Integrated procurement of train services and hydrogen infrastructure
Two of the models considered for integrated procurement of train services and hydrogen
infrastructure are outlined below.

The LNVG H2 Model
This model is based on the planned procurement of services for Hydrail by
Landesnahverkehrgesellschaft Niedersachsen mbH (LNVG), the state local public transport company
of Lower Saxony. In this model, the provision of trains and hydrogen infrastructure were bundled into
one procurement package, while rail transport services were intended to be procured separately.
The provision of trains and hydrogen infrastructure along with the related services by one entity
reduces the risks to which the commissioning authority is exposed. Additionally, as in the
Commissioning Authority Vehicle Pool, the commissioning authority is likely to benefit from
economies of scale in procuring trains in larger quantities. The significant disadvantages are however,
the reduction in the competitive field, loss of the benefit of the experience of the rail transport
company in the vehicle procurement process, and the retention of certain risks associated with the
vehicle procurement, such as technology risk.

The H2 Service Model
The H2 Service Model builds on the LNVG H2 model by bundling rail transport operations with the
provision of trains and hydrogen infrastructure, along with the related services. The benefits of the
LNVG H2 model are enhanced. In particular, the commissioning authority can transfer all risks related
to the vehicle procurement to a fully integrated services provider. However, given the scale of the
procurement package and the inherent risks, the primary disadvantage is that there is likely to be an
even greater reduction in the competitive field.

4.10.2.2 Hydrogen in Canadian Transit Fleets
In 2010, BC Transit launched what was at the time the world’s largest fleet of HFC-powered buses186.
The project was jointly funded by the federal government and the Province of British Columbia. The
fleet of 20 fuel cell electric buses were integrated into regular service operations in Whistler, British
Columbia. The buses were supplied by Winnipeg bus manufacturer New Flyer, while the fuel cells and
batteries were provided by Ballard. Air Liquide was contracted to supply hydrogen and the company
was initially expected to construct a 1,000-kg hydrogen fuelling station in Whistler. The station never
materialized and instead, hydrogen was trucked from Quebec, leading to higher costs and
186 Canadian Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Association (CHFCA).- http://www.chfca.ca/say-h2i/cars-and-buses/bc-transit-fuel-cell-bus-fleet
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

226

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

significantly higher GHG emissions than anticipated. In 2014, BC Transit issued a request for offers to
purchase the vehicles, which were reported to have cost three times more in maintenance and fuel
costs than the diesel buses they had replaced.187

4.10.2.3 The Hydrogen Highway – California188 189 190 191
The CaH2Net is an initiative of the State of California in the USA to promote the use of hydrogen as a
fuel in transportation, thereby diversifying energy sources while ensuring environmental and
economic benefits to the state. An economic report prepared as part of the development of the
state’s hydrogen blueprint concluded that the early risks related to the development of hydrogen
fueled vehicles and products must be shared between government and the private sector.
Through a bill passed in 2005, funding was provided to co-fund up to three demonstration hydrogen
fuelling stations, purchase or lease up to two hydrogen internal combustion engine shuttle buses and
lease a fleet of up to twelve hydrogen fuelled vehicles.
A Request for Proposal (RFP) was issued to solicit competitive bids from qualified teams or individuals
including energy suppliers, original equipment manufacturers, utilities, contractors and other parties
interested in further developing and demonstrating hydrogen refuelling infrastructure in California.
The fuelling stations which were to be open to the public, were intended to demonstrate and test the
viability of the use of hydrogen as a transportation fuel.
The state committed to funding 50 percent of the cost of each station, with the state’s contribution to
be used in part, to help offset and provide incentives for the increased capital outlay and engineering
required to meet the emissions targets and new renewable energy requirement. The stations, once
completed, were required to be in operation for a minimum of two years, after which all capital
equipment paid for by state funds would become the property of the operator/successful bidder,
leaving the state with no financial or intellectual interest in the station.
An RFP was issued to solicit viable businesses with a proven track record and a demonstrated ability
to provide proven hydrogen fuelled vehicles. The vehicles, which were to be leased for a 24-month
period, were intended to demonstrate the viability of hydrogen as a fuel in transportation and of
hydrogen vehicles. The vehicles would be used in areas where they could facilitate public
demonstration, data collection and reporting requirements. The areas would have to be near
hydrogen fuelling stations and allow for sufficient travelling miles to be accumulated. The lessor
would be required to supply a new vehicle, facilitate driver training, provide educational materials and
safety information, and maintain the vehicles.
The state continues to fund new hydrogen fuelling stations. To date, the state has co-funded
62 hydrogen fuelling stations across California. Through Assembly Bill No. 8, up to $20M per year is
dedicated to support continued construction of at least 100 hydrogen fuel stations.

187 Vancouver Sun - http://www.vancouversun.com/technology/Transit+hydrogen+fleet+sale/10441639/story.html
188 “California Hydrogen Initiatives.” ARB.ca.gov. California Air Resources Board. 15 Jul. 2016. Web. 19 Oct. 2017.
189 “California Hydrogen Blueprint Plan – Volume 2.” ARB.ca.gov. California Environmental Protection Agency. May 2005.PDF. 19 Oct. 2017.
190 “RFP #05-609.” ARB.ca.gov. Air Resources Board. n.d. PDF. 19 Oct. 2017.
191 “RFP #05-610.” ARB.ca.gov. Air Resources Board. n.d. PDF. 19 Oct. 2017.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

227

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.10.2.4 Alternative Fuels in Canadian Transit/Municipal Fleets
CNG Bus Fuelling, Storage and Maintenance Facility192
In 2016, the City of Calgary signed a fixed price agreement with Plenary Infrastructure Calgary LP
(Plenary) to design, build, finance and maintain the Stoney CNG Transit Facility for Calgary Transit.
The facility will include CNG fuelling infrastructure and allow for the storage and maintenance of both
CNG and diesel fuelled vehicles, as both types of vehicles will be operated in the transit company’s
fleet as it transitions from diesel. The estimated capital cost was $174M.
Plenary Infrastructure Calgary LP is a consortium of Plenary Group (Canada) Ltd. and PCL Investments
Canada Inc. Other team members include PCL Construction Management Inc. and Johnson Controls
Canada LP.
The facility will be the first CNG transit bus storage and maintenance garage delivered through a P3
model in North America and the indoor CNG fuelling facility will be largest of its kind in North
America193. Plenary will receive a substantial completion payment and, over a 30-year concession
period, will receive monthly payments as they provide facilities maintenance and rehabilitation
services. The City’s staff will continue to service and maintain the buses.

4.10.2.5 Alternative Fuels in North American Transit/Municipal Fleets
CNG Fuelling Infrastructure and Bus Maintenance Facility Upgrade – Orlando, FL194
The Central Florida Regional Transportation Authority (LYNX) entered in to a P3 with Nopetro, a
leading natural gas fuelling infrastructure provider, to provide CNG fuelling infrastructure and convert
LYNX’ existing bus fleet to CNG. The agreement also provided for necessary upgrades to the existing
LYNX maintenance facility. The facility was intended to accommodate public access. The CNG fuelling
infrastructure was entirely privately funded and the agreement included a revenue sharing
component.
The fuelling facility was opened in April 2016.
CNG Fuelling Infrastructure – St. Johns County, FL195
St. Johns County entered a P3 arrangement with Nopetro to provide a CNG fuelling station within the
St. Johns County Public Works facility. The county provided the land on which to construct the facility,
with no charge to Nopetro for 2-3 years, while Nopetro invested US$3MM to construct the facility. The
county committed to purchase 100,000 gallons of fuel in the first year of operations. Under a separate
agreement, the county invested US$987,000to convert its fleet of 100 vehicles to CNG.
The fuelling facility opened in August 2016.
CNG Buses and Fuelling Infrastructure and Bus Maintenance Facility Upgrade – Miami Dade, FL196
Miami Dade County contracted Trillium CNG to design, build, finance, operate and maintain the CNG
facilities, upgrade maintenance facilities, and procure 300 CNG buses for the county’s public

192 The City of Calgary - http://www.calgary.ca/Transportation/TI/Pages/Transit-projects/Stoney-CNG-Transit-Bus-Garage.aspx
193 Plenary Group - https://plenarygroup.com/projects/north-america/stoney-cng-bus-storage-and-transit-facility
194 Nopetro - http://nopetro.com/nopetro-opens-nations-largest-publicprivate-compressed-natural-gas-fueling-facility/
195 Nopetro - http://nopetro.com/st-johns-county-jumps-into-natural-gas-economy-as-first-cng-facility-opens/
196 Trillium CNG - https://www.loves.com/en/news/2017/february/trillium-contract-for-cng-locations-miami-dade-dot

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

228

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

transportation system. Trillium will operate the facilities under a 10 year operations and maintenance
agreement.
The contract is valued at over US$330MM197 and the project will involve the leasing of land from the
county and the construction of two fuelling stations. Both stations will have separate fuelling facilities
that are open to the public, with a revenue sharing agreement between Trillium CNG and the county.
For the public access stations, there is a minimum annual guarantee payment, which will cover the
rent due to the county. Both stations are scheduled to be opened in 2018. It is expected that Trillium
CNG will provide the fuel for both stations, while New Flyer of America Inc. will supply the buses.
http://www.miamidade.gov/procurement/library/RFP/00096/RFP-00096-Trillium.pdf
CNG Fuelling Infrastructure and Bus Maintenance Facility Upgrade – PA198
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) entered into a 20-year P3 with Trillium
CNG under which Trillium CNG will design, build, finance, operate and maintain 29 compressed
natural gas, or CNG, facilities in Pennsylvania. The agreement also includes CNG-related updates to
existing transit maintenance and storage facilities. Seven of the fuelling station will be open the public,
with a revenue sharing agreement between PennDOT and Trillium CNG. Under the agreement
PennDOT will supply of procure the supply of CNG for the stations, including that required for the
commercial operations.
The stations were to be completed over 2017-2021 as at 27-Jul-17, 6 stations had been completed.

4.10.2.6 Electrified Train Operations in Canada
Eglinton Crosstown - Light Rail - Ontario199,200
Metrolinx and Infrastructure Ontario entered into a contract valued at $5.3B (2010$) with Crosslinx
Transit Solutions (Crosslinx), to design, build, finance and maintain the Eglinton Crosstown light rail
transit (LRT) system, which is to be operated by the Toronto Transit Commission. Crosslinx is a
consortium comprising ACS, Aecon, Ellis Don, and SNC Lavalin. Under the project agreement,
Crosslinx will maintain the LRT system for 30 years, during which they will be responsible for the
maintenance of vehicles and the lifecycle repair and renewal of building and system components.
Bombardier will supply the light rail vehicles for the project.
Energy consumption risk is shared, with price risk being retained by Metrolinx and volume risk being
borne by the consortium. The operating agreement creates an incentive for the operator to minimize
both total energy consumption and peak energy demand through a gain-share / pain-share
mechanism.

197 Fleets and Fuels - http://www.fleetsandfuels.com/fuels/cng/2017/02/loves-trillium-cng-fuelbuses-for-miami/
198 Pennsylvania Department of Transportation -http://www.penndot.gov/ProjectAndPrograms/p3forpa/Documents/CNG percent20Transit
percent20Facilities/Executed percent20Public percent20Private percent20Partnership percent20Agreement.pdf ;
http://www.penndot.gov/ProjectAndPrograms/p3forpa/Documents/CNG percent20Transit percent20Facilities/Implementation
percent20Timeline percent20V4.pdf
199 Ontario Ministry of Transportation - https://news.ontario.ca/mto/en/2015/11/crosslinx-transit-solutions-signs-contract-to-delivereglinton-crosstown-by-2021.html
200 Metrolinx - https://news.ontario.ca/mto/en/2015/11/crosslinx-transit-solutions-signs-contract-to-deliver-eglinton-crosstown-by2021.html

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

229

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Edmonton Light Rail Transit System - Alberta201
The City of Edmonton entered into a P3 agreement with TransEd Partners General Partnership
(TransEd) to design, build, finance, operate and maintain a new LRT project. The concession period is
30 years. TransEd is a consortium comprising Fengate Capital Management Ltd., EllisDon Capital Inc.,
Bechtel Development Co., and Bombardier Transportation Inc.
Through the project agreement, TransEd will supply the light rail vehicles. The energy consumption
risk is transferred to TransEd, while the energy price risk is retained by the City. The project is
availability-based, with the city setting and collecting fares.
The Confederation Line – Light Rail – Ontario202
The City of Ottawa entered into a P3 with Rideau Transit group to design, build, finance and maintain
the Confederation Line. The concession period is 30 years. The Rideau Transit consortium comprises
SNC-Lavalin, ACS Infrastructure and EllisDon. The project agreement creates an incentive for the
operator to minimize energy consumption through a gain-share / pain-share mechanism.

4.10.3 Considerations for structuring commercial arrangements
As noted in Section 4.9, the hydrogen industry, including the generation, storage, transportation and
dispensing of hydrogen is well developed globally; however, the hydrogen dispensing technology is
not at the stage to allow for the dispensing of hydrogen at the rate required to support Hydrail on the
GO network. Further to this, while the industry is well developed at large scale globally and in western
Canada, there is no significant activity in Ontario. Building this industry to support Hydrail in Ontario is
a critical factor to ensuring successful implementation. In respect of rolling stock, though there have
been some advances in the development of hydrogen powered rail vehicles, there are currently no
known cases of the development of hydrogen powered rail vehicles that can meet the performance
specifications of RER. There are many considerations along with options for proposed actions that
require further exploration if the Hydrail concept is pursued further by Metrolinx.
The entire supply chain or system model components that will be explored in this section are shown in
the CNL figure (Figure 4-48).
FIGURE 4-48 HYDRAIL SYSTEM MODEL COMPONENTS

201 PPP Canada - http://www.p3canada.ca/en/about-p3s/project-map/edmonton-light-rail-transit-system/
202 City of Ottawa - http://www.ligneconfederationline.ca/page/2/
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

230

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The following sections below provide commercial considerations on each of the components that
must be explored further to make Hydrail a functional option for Metrolinx. For the purposes of this
Report, the components have been broken down and examined in two groupings:
1. Grid Interface, Hydrogen Production, Storage, Distribution and Dispensing
2. Hydrail Rolling Stock, Operations and Maintenance of Rolling Stock and Related Maintenance
Facilities
These groupings were chosen due to the natural business lines between fuel supply chain and vehicle
supply and operations. One consortium of various firms may be able to manage the entire supply
chain in Figure 4-48, plus operations and maintenance of rolling stock; however, this will depend on
the procurement model chosen and market acceptability. This will be explored in the Procurement
Factors section below. A further separation of the supply chain, for the purposes of this Report, was
believed to lead to both inefficiencies and additional interface risks for Metrolinx, which together
negatively impact the availability of the fuel for operational needs and therefore, the success of the
program.

4.10.4 Grid Interface, Hydrogen Production, Storage, Distribution
and Dispensing
Ensuring that Hydrail will work and provide desired benefits is the first step to seeing progress;
however, for hydrogen-fueled vehicles to be successful long term on the Go network there needs to
be a strong and clear commercial foundation in place. Also, this option must be competitive and
ultimately comparable to the electrification option, while also delivering on long-term, desired
environmental benefits.
Hydrogen-powered public transit has been explained as technologically feasible by various entities
that contributed to development of this Report, but it is still unclear if the long-term costs of supplying
these non-conventional services on a very large scale are comparable to the cost of more proven
technologies for public transit elsewhere in Canada. The reality is that this uncertainty adds an
incremental level of risk not commonly seen on electrified rail or diesel locomotives for a
programming perspective (that is, will levels of service be met over time?).
These realities do not mean that Hydrail is not possible. Rather, it is extremely important to fully
understand various business factors and develop a comprehensive strategy to ensure successful
advancement of the initiative. The following section provides details on the various business factors
identified and discussed during the development of this Report.

4.10.4.1 Business Factors
While hydrogen generation, storage and transportation facilities exists in Canada, they largely
support industrial activities, with little application in transportation. One notable example of the
application of hydrogen as a fuel in Ontario is CTC’s recent pilot project to generate hydrogen on site
and use the fuel to power Brampton Distribution Centre forklifts. Due to the success of this pilot
project, this technology has also been incorporated into the new Bolton Distribution Centre in the
Town of Caledon. This application is however at a much smaller scale than required to support
Hydrail.
There is more hydrogen-powered transportation expertise worldwide (for example, Germany and
Japan), which Ontario may learn from; however, capacity and expertise for the scale envisioned to
support the GO network is not believed to be present in these markets either at this time. Aside from

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

231

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

the general state of the business, there are other specific considerations that should be addressed
prior to proceeding (Table 4-50).
TABLE 4-50 BUSINESS FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN DEPLOYING THE HYDRAIL SYSTEM FOR GO
Category
Grid Interface

Factor for Consideration
The availability of electricity to generate
hydrogen fuel must be a key consideration
for a potential Hydrail solution on the GO
network.
Electricity usage may fluctuate over time,
but is expected to remain quite constant
once processes are developed and the level
of service is determined.

Hydrogen Production

Electricity cost is important due to the high
need for power to complete the electrolysis
process and Metrolinx should further assess
the opportunities and risk of electricity costs
changing over time

Potential Steps/Options
A good understanding of capacity and volume
risk for electricity along the corridor is required,
including appropriate mitigation measures. This
may be completed in a separate study that
should include:


Finding ideal locations for generation facilities
(large and/or localized) where there is either
existing capacity or opportunity for new
capacity to be added to the grid at a low cost.



Consider bulk power purchasing agreements
once a range of volume need is known,
particularly if government is to assume risk for
the volume of electricity required to produce
hydrogen fuel.



Consider passing the risk of electricity volume
to a private partner, either through an AFP
contract or other contracting arrangement
o On previous AFP contracts, electricity
volume risk has been shared with the
private partner

Explore opportunities and reasonability to use
off-peak electricity for Hydrail with specific
consideration given to cost per megawatt and
meeting service level needs (i.e., will off-peak
electricity save substantial money, and what is the
long-term potential of this electricity staying
relatively inexpensive).
Currently, optimistic estimates for electricity are
$46 per MWh, but may range as high as $76 per
MWh.
It is unlikely that a private partner would take
pricing risk for electricity (unless increased costs
could be at least partially passed on to
government), regardless of the procurement
model; however, market sounding on this point
could be undertaken.

Hydrogen Production

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

A constant supply of water for the hydrolysis
process is also necessary and although this
is not anticipated to be a major concern for
supply and pricing, analysis is still required
to ensure risks are understood and the
technical solution is achievable within any
related constraints (i.e., if local water supply
is available)

232

Discussions with local municipal organizations is
essential to accurately forecast availability and
cost of water for the electrolysis process.

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-50 BUSINESS FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN DEPLOYING THE HYDRAIL SYSTEM FOR GO
Category
Hydrogen Production,
Storage, Distribution
& Refuelling

Factor for Consideration
There are two main options for hydrogen
production (with potential for a hybrid
model) that each come with opportunities
and challenges:
1.

2.

Hydrogen Production,
Storage, Distribution
& Refuelling

Centralized production – A large facility
or facilities capable of efficiently
producing hydrogen in large quantities
o The facility can be located where
electricity, water and land is
available – reducing short-term
costs
o Requires transport of fuel via truck
or pipeline to where the fuel is
needed for refilling stations
o Interface risk exists, as the fuel is
required to be moved longer
distances
o Pipelines are expensive and may
not be able to be built within the
existing right of way or through
well-developed commercial and
residential communities
o Trucking the fuel will at least
partially offset GHG emission
reductions (assuming trucks use
fossil fuels), which is a desired
outcome of RER

Potential Steps/Options
Metrolinx needs to determine the best approach
from cost, risk, strategy and various other
perspectives. Depending on the scale of Hydrail
relative to the entire GO network (e.g., pilot
program, only part of the network or the entire
network), the generation and distribution options
may become clearer.
CTC recognized benefits of an on-site hydrogen
generation solution, which has now been
replicated at a second warehouse location. This
being said, the scale of their operation is
estimated at approximately <1 percent of the
scale contemplated on the GO network (i.e., 200
to 300 kg of hydrogen per day vs. 40 tonnes per
day).
Understanding opportunities for land acquisition
for both options is critical, particularly for the
decentralized option where production facilities
would be located near existing, busier stations
along the corridor. From a business perspective,
it will be difficult to transfer land acquisition risk
to the private partner for this government
initiative, especially since government has
expropriation rights that can be triggered if
required.

Decentralized production – Many
localized generation facilities that are
located at or near the sites that require
the fuel
o There is limited need for
distribution of the fuel, reducing
cost and GHGs or transport
o Land acquisition is required at sites
near where fuelling of trains is
required
o Inefficiencies of production and
staffing may result

Technical labour supply is anticipated to be
limited outside of research facilities and
smaller industrial competencies. There may
be some transferrable knowledge from
other related industries (e.g., industrial
natural gas) that will lessen the impact of this
potential issue; however, that is yet to be
determined.

There will be a need to educate technicians to
operate and maintain the hydrogen fuel supply
chain and also HFC-powered rail vehicles. This
may not be a risk that can be adequately
transferred to a private partner; however, market
sounding may provide more details. This needs
to be explored further depending on the
feasibility and related scale of Hydrail on the GO
network.
Some colleges in Canada and the United States
have existing programs or have started to plan
for future programming to train employees for
this industry. One example is Stark College in

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

233

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-50 BUSINESS FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN DEPLOYING THE HYDRAIL SYSTEM FOR GO
Category

Factor for Consideration

Potential Steps/Options
Ohio, which has a program for Fuel Cell
Technology. Further, colleges in Canada have
recently facilitated forums or meetings related to
hydrogen fuel technology, including Canadore
College in North Bay, Ontario and Red River
College in Manitoba.
Partnerships and funding (public and private) to
support skills training in this industry is crucial to
ensure the skills and abilities exist for an initiative
as large as Hydrail on the GO network.

General - Regulatory

The CHIC falls under the TSSA; however,
this regulatory framework does not seem to
accommodate hydrogen powered trains on
a large scale. Without an adequate
regulatory framework, it will be difficult for
companies to assume risk on this type of
venture.

Engagement with Transport Canada is believed
to be underway with CNL providing advice on
safety and other related factors. Currently, there
is no regulatory framework in place for hydrogen
powered trains and the timeline is unclear. A plan
of action, including for required consultations
and engagement with involved agencies, should
be developed and actioned.
There have been licences granted in Canada for
hydrogen powered equipment, including forklifts
and vehicles (e.g., buses). This will provide a
baseline for future work in the area.

4.10.5 Hydrail Rolling Stock, Operations and Maintenance of Rolling
Stock and Related Maintenance Facilities
The Ontario Ministry of Transportation and Metrolinx recently issued an RFP to allow various rail
vehicle manufacturers to develop designs and determine the overall impacts on the addition of fuel
cell technology on BL trains. The focus of this procurement was on how this relatively new technology
may impact the overall RER business case, service delivery and ultimately the performance of the GO
network. Responses have recently been received and are being evaluated by government officials.
The results of this process, which are still unknown, are expected to lead into the planning of an
integrated DBFOM procurement should Hydrail be considered a potential technical solution for the
RER Strategy.
Although the results of this process may add clarity to what options exist for rolling stock, there are
other commercial considerations as well. These are explored further below.

4.10.5.1 Business Factors
Hydrogen powered vehicles are a relatively new concept compared to other traditional methods,
primarily fossil-fuel (that is, diesel) public transportation vehicles. Though on a relatively small scale,
there are many examples of the application in buses, particularly in Europe and in California. Also,
current plans are being implemented in Japan for over 100 Toyota hydrogen powered buses for the
Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games. There are no examples of hydrogen fuelled trains in commercial
operation.
Aside from the current state of business for hydrogen powered vehicles, there are other specific
considerations that should be addressed as Hydrail is contemplated for the GO network (Table 4-51).
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

234

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-51 COMMERCIAL FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED IN DEPLOYING THE HYDRAIL SYSTEM FOR GO
Category

Factor for Consideration

Potential Steps/Options

Hydrogen Vehicle

Lack of competition for the manufacturing,
operations and maintenance of hydrogen
powered trains could leave government in a
difficult business position. Depending on the
structure of related procurement processes,
this could lead to limited competition and price
or quality risk for government.
Based on research completed to date, Alstom
is the only company advanced in the
manufacturing of HFC passenger trains,
although Siemens recently announced a train
development agreement with fuel cell
company, Ballard. Further, Alstom’s current
hydrogen powered rolling stock is in the pilot
project stage, has not been proven for widescale use and is a different train set compared
to requirements planned to date for Metrolinx.
It is also important to note that European rail
manufacturers Alstom and Siemens have
announced intentions to merge operations. It is
unclear what this means for the hydrogen
powered train program in Germany.

Hydrail pilot projects could be possible on
sections of the GO network that are more difficult
for overhead electrification (should electrification
be chosen as the preferred option). Ideally, this
would occur once existing diesel locomotives are
nearing the end of their useful lives. This might
include Milton and Richmond Hill sections due to
physical restrictions and potential environmental
and stakeholder concerns.
This approach would allow for a phased-in
approach to hydrogen powered rail and also lead
to a more organic development of the related
industry in Canada on a larger scale than currently
exists.
If Hydrail is chosen as either a potential or
preferred model for the entire GO network, some
or all of these risks may be able to be transferred
to a private partner(s), depending on the
procurement model chosen. A market sounding
would be required to determine what may be
acceptable to industry. Also, depending on the
results of the recent RFP issued, which asked rail
vehicle manufacturers to develop Hydrail options,
these risks may be mitigated.

Timing of
Hydrogen Vehicle
Introduction

Useful life still exists on existing diesel
locomotives in the GO fleet and it is planned
that any private partner would assume
responsibility for these locomotives

Opportunity to phase-in a new approach (e.g.,
electrification or Hydrail) may be considered so
that priority segments are completed in early
phases and lesser priorities are completed in the
future. This will allow for lessons learned to be
applied on future phases. The structuring of
procurement may still allow for one consortium to
complete all phases or for phases to be split up to
allow for increased competitive tension in the
market.

Hydrogen Vehicle
Operations

To ensure that Metrolinx operations are not
interrupted, a constant, uninterrupted fuel
supply is required by the vehicle operator. It is
unlikely that there will be another hydrogen
fuel provider outside of this initiative that will be
able to provide the large scale of fuel required
daily to ensure no loss of service.

Control for on-site hydrogen storage, dispensing
and refuelling may be best placed at the operator
level; however, there would still not be a
guarantee that interface risk won’t occur. A plan
for redundancy in the case that hydrogen fuel not
be available should be developed.

The East Rail and Eglinton Crosstown
Maintenance Facilities are examples of recent
capital investments made by Metrolinx to
improve maintenance of rolling stock. These
facilities have not been designed to
accommodate Hydrail and the cost and impact
on timeline of retrofits, if required, is unknown.

A report detailing the impact of Hydrail on existing
maintenance facilities should be completed. This
would include an understanding of costs and
timelines associated with improvements (e.g.,
mechanical, electrical, safety).

Hydrogen Vehicle
Maintenance

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

235

Alternatively, full integration of the supply chain
identified in Figure 4-48 could be accomplished
with one large procurement with the risk of fuel
not being available being fully passed to the
private partner.

This may not be an issue; however, to date there is
a lack of clarity on this potential issue.

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.10.6 Procurement Factors
Innovation through procurement is essential for governments to obtain the best value for money on
major initiatives like the RER strategy. Allowing the private sector to determine the best solution for
meeting certain program and service level needs, within performance specifications to be developed
by government, has proven to produce positive results across various infrastructure types and
jurisdictions. Applying these same principles to rolling stock and associated infrastructure throughout
the GO network is an option that may be pursued, depending on the results of discussions with
industry.
If Project Specific Output Specifications (PSOS) are drafted to allow Hydrail approaches to meet
government’s needs, rather than specify that certain technologies must or must not be used, there will
be room for innovative and cost-effective approaches that capture the purchase, operations,
maintenance of rolling stock and infrastructure (for example, supply chain for hydrogen fuel or
electrification of the network) required to make the system function long term.
The alternative would be to specify the type of technology or particular approach to infrastructure that
must be used either for the entire GO network or for particular sections. This can be done through a
traditional (that is, Design-Bid-Build) procurement model or also by tightening performance
specifications in such a way that only one solution may be technically compliant during evaluation.
Although this approach may be required in certain unique circumstances (for example, requirement
to meet legislation or stakeholder concerns), industry will be constrained in their approaches to
innovation the more constraints that are put on the procurement parameters.
This typically has the impact of increased timeline and cost, which ultimately reduces value for money
long term.

4.10.6.1 Procurement and Project Objectives
Major capital initiatives like the RER strategy have focussed on determining what desired outcomes
are for a successful procurement. The intent is to choose the right tools that will ultimately offer a
highly effective solution to meeting both short and long-term needs of the organization. The first step
of this process is typically to develop project and procurement objectives, which provide a high-level
indication of considerations and constraints specific to the Project, which would be used to assess the
strategic alignment of different procurement options available to Metrolinx. The information below
provides an example of what these objectives might look like for RER.
Project Objectives


The desired public transit service objectives



To comply with affordability criteria



Financial and planning flexibility regarding long term strategic objectives



The nature of the assets and services to be delivered (longevity and quality)



Value engineering or innovation provided by the private sector



Local contractor involvement in the Project and the extent to which training and education
opportunities are provided

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

236

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Procurement Objectives


The degree of participation in the procurement process and the competition generated



The fairness and transparency of the process



The extent to which Metrolinx receives schedule and cost certainty from the private sector
contractors



The ability to optimally allocate risk between the government and private sector



Ability to ensure no loss of service and to limit risk to government



Compliance with existing trade agreements (for example, Agreement on Internal Trade)

It is important to note that these have not been discussed with Metrolinx to date and are only
provided to illustrate how organizational objectives may impact the procurement model that is
ultimately chosen. Analysis is typically undertaken, beginning with a workshop setting, to narrow
down options to those that will delivered on desired outcomes.

4.10.6.2 Procurement options – Hydrail focus
There are numerous procurement options that may be considered for delivery of a Hydrail solution,
should this be chosen as a possible technical solution to meet Metrolinx’s long-term needs. These
options should be developed based on the size of the project scope, timeline considerations,
optimization of risk transfer, value for money and other objectives.
Various funding mechanisms have been explored in other similar studies (for example, CaH2Net),
including market-based concepts, subsidization of industry often through tax breaks and/or grants to
allow for development, sole-source mandates for a period of time until an industry is mature and
other reinforcing approaches like financial or non-financial awards and incentives. Although these
models may be successful in some instances, they are not believed to be applicable for what
Metrolinx is working towards accomplishing on the GO network. There may be potential however for
certain funding mechanisms to be used on smaller scope items connected to the initiative (for
example, licences to sell hydrogen to other customers beyond Metrolinx).
Although many options exist, for the purposes of this report, there are two potential procurement
approaches that are explored further as potential options to meet known objectives. This analysis is
not intended to be comprehensive in nature, as limited information still exists; however, it does
provide an indication of potential solutions for incorporating Hydrail into the RER strategy. Further
discussion and analysis will be required depending on the outcome of this Report.
Option 1: Broadened Output Specifications on Integrated DBFOM to Accommodate Hydrail
It may not be good practice to choose between overhead electrification and Hydrail at this point in
the project, but instead allow the market some flexibility to determine best value within certain
government established parameters (that is, PSOS during procurement). Recent decisions have been
made to undertake an Integrated DBFOM procurement, rather than separating the infrastructure from
the rolling stock and operator. This is an opportunity for Hydrail, since the infrastructure required for
the supply chain is integral to the operations of the rolling stock.
Unless the Government of Ontario plans to use Hydrail as a catalyst to build the hydrogen
transportation industry to support a larger Province-wide strategy, the procurement can be structured
to allow for various technical solutions within defined PSOS. These specifications (and proposal
evaluation criteria) can focus on maximum GHG emissions, noise, land available, level of service
requirements (for example, trip time, passenger volume), safety requirements, as well as price, and
many other important factors.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

237

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

As the indicative design is being developed in advance of release of an RFP, considerations would
need to be given to Hydrail to ensure the PSOS are broad enough to allow for related innovations.
Examples include ensuring land availability for certain elements of the hydrogen production,
developing an appropriate regulatory framework for Hydrail and assisting with skilled workforce
development through universities and colleges.
Private sector consortiums bidding on the RFP would then determine the best approaches, including
both Hydrail and electrification, to ensure technical compliance. A Project affordability ceiling (based
on the indicative design) would be another key constraint outside of technical compliance. Metrolinx
would need to be more open to innovations under this approach and the market would likely need to
be accepting of more risk associated with technology, operations, land acquisition, stakeholder
consultation and other items. This is because Metrolinx cannot assume direct risk that a private sector
innovation (beyond what is proposed in the indicative design) will not function as planned to provide
the intended service or outcomes that are acceptable to stakeholders and the general public.
A potential variation of this option would be to have two or more separate DBFOM procurements;
however, due to the potential for interface risk and the decision to proceed with an integrated
DBFOM procurement, this option was not explored further in the Report.
Ultimately, this option provides flexibility for the market to determine the most appropriate solution
instead of government dictating that overhead electrification or Hydrail is the desired solution. The
following are potential pros and cons of this approach (Table 4-52).
TABLE 4-52 BROADENING OUTPUT SPECIFICATIONS ON INTEGRATED DBFOM TO ACCOMMODATE
HYDRAIL
Pros

Cons

Decisions and associated risks on overhead electrification
vs. Hydrail are shared with the private sector, rather than
assumed 100 percent by government

If Hydrail was considered a catalyst for further hydrogen
industry development, this may not occur

Innovation often leads to lower costs and increased value
for money for the same quality of service envisioned

More time may be required to broaden PSOS to allow for
Hydrail, which could delay the planned schedule

Stakeholder consultation risk is shared with a private sector
partner, as the technology decision is not the sole
responsibility of government

Some planning (e.g., preparation of stations for overhead
electrification, land acquisition assumptions) may become
redundant depending on the solution chosen

A broadened PSOS may lead to increased industry
competition (that is, not only companies that have
experience with overhead electrification)

There is increased pressure on government to come up
with PSOS that are broad enough to allow for innovation

It should be noted that even if Hydrail is chosen as the preferred technology option on which the
indicative design would be based upon, a broadened PSOS may still be a good procurement
strategy. Innovations outside of existing technical or business assumptions may be possible with a
more flexible approach to procurement of an initiative that is as complicated and unprecedented as
the RER strategy.
Option 2: Hydrail Pilot Projects
Other jurisdictions, specifically Germany, have decided to run pilot projects for new technologies
such as hydrogen powered rail projects to determine feasibility for broader application in the future.
This approach not only allows for adequate testing of a new and mostly unproven technology (that is,
for rail transportation) prior to a larger program-wide implementation, but also allows for time to
develop public acceptability of the technology and overall industry maturity.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

238

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

From a procurement standpoint, there several ways that pilot projects can be approached and
implemented. Commitments recently made by the Ontario government have discounted the
possibility of undertaking Hydrail pilot projects prior to proceeding with the electrification of the
entire GO network. Therefore, Hydrail pilot projects may be best suited for sections of the GO
network that are not easily electrified for various reasons, including flooding and stakeholder
concerns. These are sections where diesel locomotives may be the natural alternative if overhead
electrification is not possible or desirable. This approach, although workable from a level of service
perspective, is not believed to be aligned to the Province’s low emissions goals.
Hydrail pilot projects may be procured separately or as a package under various models using more
traditional approaches where full design is completed or various AFP approaches. These
procurement options have not been analyzed in detail for this Report; however, risk transfer with the
private delivery partner may be better suited for a packaged DBFOM, rather than more traditional
design, bid, build (DBB).
These potential pilot projects may also be considered for integration with the larger integrated
DBFOM strategy, but further analysis and discussion with industry and stakeholders would be
required before this approach was considered. Since Project Co. is expected to take over
responsibility of the existing Metrolinx fleet currently servicing the GO network, this approach may
provide the best opportunity for innovation and incorporation of leading asset management practices
(that is, using the diesel locomotives until replacement is required for asset management reasons).
The following are potential pros and cons of this approach (Table 4-53).
TABLE 4-53 RUNNING PILOT PROJECTS FOR HYDRAIL
Pros

Cons

Testing of the Hydrail related technology would occur prior
to a program-wide implementation sometime in the future,
which would lessen the risk profile for government

There is likely interface risk between the Hydrail pilot
projects and the rest of the GO network if overhead
electrification is implemented on the rest of the network
This approach may lead to a separation of sections
throughout the GO network, which could lead to
inefficiencies; however, this may be at least partially
mitigated with good planning.

A more natural development of the hydrogen fuel industry
will occur if the pilot project is successful

The scale of pilot projects is smaller and economies of scale
may be impacted on the rest of the network, which may
lead to higher cost delivery of services

Government reduces its risk of the technology not working
and service being significantly interrupted to a confined
section(s) of the network

Innovations, cost savings and other positive features of
Hydrail, should they be realized, will be limited to smaller
sections of the network

The timing of pilot projects can be aligned to the
diminishing useful life of existing diesel locomotives, which
may be proven to be a good value for taxpayer money (i.e.,
not abandoning good quality diesel locomotives
immediately)

Duplication of operators, maintenance providers and
infrastructure to support the entire network will likely result,
as different approaches will be required for Hydrail and
overhead electrification

4.10.7 Timeline Considerations
Many of the outstanding commercial and procurement related aspects of Hydrail will take
considerable amounts of time to address. Although many of these issues can be addressed in parallel,
others require a more sequential approach. For instance, a review and purchase of land to
accommodate hydrogen generation and storage is only possible once it is known where capacity
exists for both electricity on the grid and water for the hydrolysis process.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

239

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The procurement model and approach to proceed with Hydrail (pilot project on a portion of the
network vs. application for the entire network), should it be deemed to be a good option, is also likely
to impact the timeline of the RER strategy. The current plan for procurement of overhead
electrification of the GO network is:


RFQ – spring 2018 to summer 2018



RFP – summer 2018 to summer 2019



Financial close late 2019

It is unclear if preparations for accommodating Hydrail within this currently planned timeline could be
achieved, especially since various Hydrail implementation/procurement options may still be chosen. If
Hydrail is pursued as separate pilot projects, it more likely that the existing critical path for overhead
electrification could be achieved.
In any case, if Hydrail is to be considered alongside or shortly following the existing overhead
electrification timeline, the following actions should be started in early 2018:


Further clarification and development of the regulatory framework to support Hydrail and the
related supply chain



Continue working with industry (that is, train manufacturers) to better understand what is possible
to facilitate the inclusion of hydrogen powered rolling stock



Continue engaging with potential investors to better understand their willingness to accept risk on
new technology on a major infrastructure project



Develop and implement a labour force strategy to ensure adequate supply of qualified labour to
support Hydrail once it is in operation



Broadening of PSOS to allow for Hydrail (only if it is being allowable as an innovation through the
planned integrated DBFOM procurement)



Develop a supply and demand strategy for electricity and water to support hydrogen production
along or near the GO network corridor



Develop a land acquisition study and follow up implementation strategy to accommodate Hydrail
(that is, bidders are unlikely to want to take the risk of acquiring land to accommodate the
hydrogen production and distribution supply chain when government has expropriation rights)



Ensure that the Hydrail option is aligned (or at least not prevented from being achieved) with
existing Package 1 and 2 design work. This should be done in advance of procurements through
design requirements, similar to how installation of four Overhead Catenary System (OCS) concrete
bases are being installed during station developments to accommodate overhead electrification
of the Go network.

At some point in early 2018, a go/no-go decision needs to be made on how or if Hydrail will be
approached to meet Metrolinx RER Strategy goals. This date may be further into the future if separate
pilot projects are being pursued; however, a decision still needs to be made in early 2018 as to what
the scope of these pilot projects will be because there will be implications for the larger integrated
DBFOM procurement.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

240

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.11

Transition Plan

This section describes how the Hydrail System could become operational within the RER program.

4.11.1 Strategy to Introduce Hydrail
A DBFOM RFQ and RFP process is presently being prepared for the RER program. The timeline for
this process is still under review but is presently planned to be launched at the end of Q1-2018, with
the RFP issuance in Q4-2018. Given the significance of this procurement, a contract award for this
scope of work is not anticipated until the end of Q1-2020.
The DBFOM contract is expected to cover the infrastructure modifications required for RER
independently of the rolling stock technology, for example track, signalling, communications, stations.
It will also give the opportunity to the different proponents to propose their preferred electrification
solution; either wired, with the installation of an overhead catenary system, or a wireless alternative
that could be addressed by Hydrail.
As a result, the DBFOM procurement process is likely to be a strong influencing factor in the decision
concerning whether Hydrail is implemented.
Considering the scenario that Hydrail is the preferred electrification solution of the successful DBFOM
proponent, there are several important factors for consideration in determining how Hydrail could be
brought into service:
1. Decisions about where and how the hydrogen is to be produced, and how the HFC-powered rail
vehicles will be refuelled will influence how long it will take to design and implement the required
static infrastructure:


As part of the scope of work that is described in the Next Steps section we are recommending
the further study is undertaken in these areas;



However, the milestones of first vehicle testing, production vehicle testing and commissioning,
and initial service on one corridor could all be achieved using temporary facilities and shortterm supply contracts.

2. The design of a HFC-powered locomotive or EMU will also depend on decisions and progress
relating to the specification and design of the:


RER train service plan



Rail vehicle performance requirements and technical specifications



Signalling system



Train protection system



Rail vehicle stabling and maintenance facilities.

All of these factors are outside the scope of the Hydrail program to assess at this stage in terms of
how they will be undertaken and what milestone dates are achievable.
3. The decision as to which corridor to use to introduce an initial Hydrail service will depend on:


The RER infrastructure upgrade plan and actual progress made against this plan



Which corridor represents the optimum choice in terms of benefits delivery from the enhanced
performance of electric trains.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

241

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

As with point 2, these factors are outside the scope of the Hydrail program to assess at this stage
in terms of how they will be undertaken and what milestone dates are achievable.
In relation to considering the Hydrail System’s ability to transition into service, it is significant to
understand that a Hydrail service can be commenced incrementally once individual rail vehicles are
commissioned and approved for service, and a basic supporting fuelling and maintenance
infrastructure is in place.
This compares to the overhead catenary system where a whole corridor would need to be completed
and commissioned before revenue services could commence.

4.11.2 Timescales
On the assumption that the first set of factors do not impose a constraint on the ability of Hydrail to be
implemented at its preferred pace, and that we can take advantage of an incremental start of service,
the proposed transition plan for Hydrail is outlined in the schedule below (Figure 4-49).
FIGURE 4-49 TRANSITION PLAN SCHEDULE

Some of the key assumptions underlying this proposed transition plan are that:


Key learnings from the HFC Bi-level EMU Concept Design and the HFC Locomotive Concept
Design projects are incorporated into the DBFOM process;



Key learnings from the HFC locomotive detailed design, build and test project are incorporated
into the Hydrail Rail Vehicle Design project and the build and testing of the first Hydrail vehicles;



Key learnings from the Hydrail subsystems concept designs (as defined in the “Recommended
Next Steps” section) are incorporated into the Hydrail Infrastructure Design and Build project;

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

242

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT



Other activities particularly those relating to the definition of how railway operations would be
managed for a Hydrail System and how regulatory approval would be achieved are successfully
completed.

On this basis, it is considered feasible that the production of HFC rail vehicles could commence in
2023 and that an initial service on one corridor could commence in mid-2024. If this initial service is
then incrementally enhanced over the course of a year it would then be possible to introduce HFC rail
vehicles into service on the other corridors in accordance with the rate at which they are
manufactured.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

243

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.12

Risks and Opportunities

The successful implementation of the Hydrail System would require significant and unique challenges
to be managed. Successfully managing such a large program would be inherently ‘risky’ due to the
uncertainty and complexity associated with integrating hydrogen technologies in a heavy rail context
on such a large scale.
The objective of this section is to explore and evaluate those sources of uncertainty and complexity
which could have an impact on the cost, timing, performance and other benefits of the Hydrail System
and to compare these as an alternative to the planned electrification solution.
Our assessment classifies risks in three categories of when the risk might occur:


System Design Risks – these are risks that could occur during the Hydrail System design phase,



System Implementation Risks – these are risks that could occur during the Hydrail System
implementation phase, and



System Operation Risks – these are risks that could occur during the operation of the Hydrail
System.

The risks have been evaluated in terms of:


Our assessment of the probability of the risk occurring based on our current level of knowledge of
the risk – this is represented as high, medium, or low,



The significance of the impact that the risk would have on achieving the objectives of the Hydrail
Program if this risk occurs – this is represented as high, medium, or low.

The risk assessment also contains our recommendations of the actions that could be taken to mitigate
the probability and/or significance of the risk.
At the same time, we have also identified opportunities for Hydrail to generate benefits in addition to
those assessed in the feasibility study. These Hydrail opportunities are described at the end of the
section.

4.12.1 System Design Risks
4.12.1.1 Regulatory Framework for HFC Rail Vehicles
There might be significant concerns raised by Transport Canada relating to the crashworthiness,
refuelling, maintenance, and degraded service of the hybrid HFC subsystem on rail vehicle.


Type: System Design.



Probability of risk occurring: Medium - There are many codes and standards that will apply to the
design of the fuel cell subsystems. There is also the experience of gaining regulatory approval of
the Alstom train in Germany. However, there is a lack of experience of the use of hydrogen within
Transport Canada and there is the potential for the process of obtaining safety case approval to be
protracted.



Significance: High – If this risk occurs it could add a significant amount of time to the planned
milestones of commencing Hydrail train services.



Mitigation: Proactive engagement with Transport Canada to discuss and develop a
comprehensive safety risk assessment through out all the development stages of Hydrail. Parallel

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

244

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

engagement with TSSA and CSA to help demonstrate the existing certification for individual HFC
system components.


Comparative assessment with Electrification: There is less risk to electrification, since electric
locomotives and EMUs operate on many rail systems. The common risk that would apply to both
Hydrail and Electrification is in the use of UIC compliant EMUs on GO, which has traditionally
operated FRA compliant passenger and freight locomotives.

4.12.1.2 Model-related Risks
The development of the Hydrail Operational Simulation Model required making assumptions about
future operations and costs, in addition to assumptions about system operations and train
performance. There is a risk that these assumptions could be significantly too optimistic, resulting in
higher than expected operating costs, more developmental risk, or poorer performance than
anticipated.


Type: System Design



Probability of risk occurring - Low



The development of the Hydrail Operational Simulation Model involved engagement with subject
matter experts in the industry and research institutions and universities. In addition to this, the
components being modelled exist as individual units and are highly scalable. Input and reviews
from multiple parties will have reduced the risk of too optimistic assumptions.



Significance – Medium



While there is uncertainty around some of the assumptions, a thorough sensitivity analysis around
these assumptions has lowered the level of uncertainty. Additionally, contingency percentages are
included in the operational simulation modelling estimates.



Mitigation: It is proposed to carry out further development work on the Operational Simulation
Model as part of the “Recommmended Next Steps” activities defined in Section 6.



Comparative assessment with Electrification: There is a similar risk within the modelling that has
been done for electrification in relation to the forecast capital and operating costs. However, this
should be lower than for the Hydrail System because the scope is better defined and there will be
fewer assumptions.

4.12.1.3 System Integration Complexity of the HFC Rail Vehicles
There is a risk that the design period of the HFC rail vehicles is greater than planned due to
unexpected complexities that emerge in integrating the hybrid HFC subsystem into the existing EMU
and locomotive platforms.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring – Medium
The feasibility study report from Hydrogenics on the HFC locomotive has not identified any
significant systems integration risks and we know from the Alstom Coradi iLint, the CRRC Gaoming
project and other one-off rail vehicle projects that this is not an insurmountable problem.
However, we also know that modern rail vehicles are complex machines where equipment needs
to be installed in very confined spaces. Therefore, it would not be surprising if some system
integration challenges are encountered during the design phase which require unplanned scope
of work to resolve.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

245

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT



Significance – Medium
If this risk occurs it could have a consequential impact in the start of the build phase and,
therefore, on the start of revenue services. However, we would be confident that these types of
issues could be resolved through focussed engineering effort which would not have a significant
impact on the development, test and build durations of the HFC rail vehicles.



Mitigation: The current HFC Rail Vehicle Projects, within the Hydrail Program scope, are intended
to be part of the process of mitigating this risk by investigating, at a conceptual level, how a hybrid
HFC subsystem would be integrated into a locomotive and a bi-level EMU platforms. The outputs
of this work are intended to inform the RER rail vehicle systems engineering strategy that will be
adopted by the rail vehicle manufacturer.



Comparative assessment with Electrification: There is no significant risk to electrification, since
electric locomotives and EMUs exist in the market and do not require any additional equipment to
be integrated into them to meet the RER electrification requirements.

4.12.1.4 Operational Range of the HFC Rail Vehicles
There is a risk that the HFC locomotive or the HFC EMU will need to be refueled with hydrogen within
their daily operational hours to be able to operate the planned number of trips in the RER train service
plan.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring – Medium
Assumptions have been made in the Operational Simulation model about the space that will be
available on the rail vehicles for the storage of hydrogen. The HFC locomotive and HFC EMU
concept design projects might identify that these assumptions are too optimistic and that the
amount of hydrogen, in gas form, that can be carried should be reduced, which in turn will reduce
the range that the rail vehicle can operate before refuelling.



Significance – Medium
If this risk occurs it would have an impact on the operation of the Hydrail System as it would
require refuelling of the rail vehicles to take place within the operating day. The impact of this on
the proposed RER train service plan and fleet size is unclear; however, it would not be substantially
different from the impact of the refuelling that takes place during the day for the current fleet of
diesel locomotives.



Mitigation: It is planned to mitigate this risk by:
a) setting the rail vehicle manufacturers, working on the concept designs, the objective of
maximising the volume of compressed gas hydrogen that can be accommodated on their
vehicles, without compromising functionality and safety
b) optimising the train service patterns and associated duty cycles that a Hydrail rail service would
operate to minimize the amount of hydrogen that would be needed for an all-day service
without refuelling.



Comparative assessment with Electrification: There is no significant risk to electrification, since
electric locomotives and EMUs do not carry their own fuel on-board and can draw as power as
they need, when they need it, from the overhead catenary system.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

246

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.12.1.5 Performance of the HFC rail vehicles
There is a risk that it might not be possible to design the HFC rail vehicles so that they can operate the
proposed RER train service plan on each corridor.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring – Medium
The sizing of the components of the hybrid HFC subsystem for the HFC locomotive and the HFC
EMU has been calculated to meet the acceleration and peak power demands needed to operate
the RER train service plan. This sizing has been undertaken by CNL and has been corroborated
independently by modelling from Hydrogenics as part of their HFC locomotive support services.
However, HFC rail vehicles with the required performance characteristics have not been built
before and therefore there could be unknown risks that emerge during the design phase that
could reduce the forecast performance capability.



Significance – Medium
If this risk occurs it is only likely to reduce the expected performance levels by a relatively small
amount, which in turn should not significantly affect the BCR for the project.



Mitigation: It is planned to mitigate this risk by undertaking more detail calculations, during the
next stage of the project, of the performance of the hybrid HFC subsystem based on a clearer
definition of the required duty cycles for each corridor.
We will also consider the opportunity (described below) of designing the hybrid HFC subsystem
with a slightly reduced performance objective to determine the impact that this would have on
system capital and operating cost compared to the resulting reduction in RER benefits.



Comparative assessment with Electrification: There is no significant risk to electrification, since the
train service plan for RER has been designed to be achievable using currently available electric
locomotives and BL EMUs.

4.12.1.6 Environmental Assessments
The Hydrail System will require Environmental Assessments to be undertaken for the hydrogen
production facilities. There is a risk that this process will take longer than planned, creating challenges
in achieving the committed dates for RER service.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring: Medium - The likelihood that this risk will occur is currently Medium
as there has not yet been any engagement with the planning authorities.



Significance: Medium - If environmental compliance and approvals are not achieved by about
2022 it would have an impact on the commencement of construction of these facilities.



Mitigation: Proactive engagement will be required with the MOECC, local conservation
authorities, and municipal and provincial governments to begin the Environmental Approval
process.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: Environmental assessments for the Electrification
work is underway and engagement has already commenced with local authorities to meet RER
dates. However, there could be objections raised from local residents to the network in relation to
construction noise, vegetation removal and visual intrusion.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

247

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.12.1.7 Infrastructure Required for Hydrail
The electrolyzer, storage and refuelling subsystems will need to be designed to allow for efficient
operations of the Hydrail network. The detailed design of this infrastructure needs further
investigation and there is a risk that a fundamental scope or process issue will be discovered during
this work that will have a significant impact on the expected efficiency and cost of operation.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring: Low - The Hydrail System uses standard off-the-shelf
componentswhose performance characteristics are proven.



Significance: High - The impact of this risk is significant as it could have a significant impact on the
functional and economic viability of Hydrail.



Mitigation: It is intended to mitigate this risk by undertaking concept designs of these subsystems
as described in the “Recommended Next Steps” section.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: This is a low risk for electrification. Overhead wires
and signalling immunization will need to be installed. The risk is mitigated by the know-how that
exists in the industry.

4.12.1.8 Technological Development of Hydrail
Since a Hydrail System has not yet been implemented at the scale RER requires, there could be
challenges related to the scaling of the HFC subsystems, and potential performance limitations due
challenges in systems integration.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring: Low - This is mainly a systems integration risk that will be
approached through engineering design with major equipment manufacturers. The risk that scale
effects could have a significant detrimental impact is low as the components are modular.



Significance: Medium - If system integration issues do occur, particularly with the rail vehicles and
the refuelling facility it could delay the start of implementation or reduce the performance of the
Hydrail System below expected levels.



Mitigation: The development of the concept designs and subsequent prototypes will allow a
detailed analysis of the system integration and scalability. Engagement with major industry
manufacturers and universities to test concepts in their testing facilities will help evolve the design
to the requisite levels of performance and reliability.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: There is a lower risk to electrification, since OCS
equipment and electric rail vehicles use technology that have a high level of component
development and systems integration. Locomotives and EMUs are certified and exist in the
market.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

248

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.12.1.9 Private Sector Risk Assessment of Hydrail
It is currently intended that the Hydrail System is included in the RER DBFOM procurement scope.
Due to the unfamiliarity that many proponents will have with hydrogen and the Hydrail System they
could consider it to contain a high level of risk, resulting in them applying a significant cost premium
to it for the development, operation and maintenance of the system.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring: Medium - The likelihood that this risk occurs will be driven by how
the risk profile of Hydrail is seen to compare to that of Electrification, and how the risk transfer
mechanisms are defined in the DBFOM contract.



Significance: High - There is a high level of significance related to this risk as it will be a
fundamental driver as to whether the Hydrail System is preferred to Electrification.



Mitigation: It is intended to mitigate this risk by undertaking further development work on the
definition and design of the Hydrail System across several areas, including: subsystems concept
designs, hydrogen production locations, railway operations, capital and operating costs, transition
plan, and codes and standards. The scope of this work is outlined in the Recommended Next
Steps section.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: Potential proponents might also see a high level of
risk associated with Electrification in relation to the: capital cost of implementation, operating cost,
and transfer of risks such as utilities diversions and operational disruption.

4.12.1.10 Implications to RER Scope of Work due to Hydrail
There is a risk that the functional requirements of the Hydrail System might require significant
additional infrastructure within the scope of work of RER.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring: Low - The feasibility study has not identified areas of the operation of
the Hydrail System that are likely to have a significant impact on the scope of the RER
infrastructure. The area that this risk is most relevant to is the design of the stabling yards in
relation to the: design of the refuelling storage and dispensing facilities, and design of station
platforms for the operation of 12 carriage consists with 12 locomotives.



Significance: Medium - The objective of the refuelling system for Hydrail is to replicate the
operational functionality of refuelling the current diesel fleet. However, the implications of
refuelling a much larger fleet of trains than currently exists will make this process more
complicated than at present.



Mitigation: A thorough study with Metrolinx Planning and Policy, and Fleet Operations will need to
be conducted to better understand the RER service plan approach. Following this, a technical
analysis will be conducted with Fleet Engineering to understand the impact of HFC locomotives
and EMUs to achieve the RER level of service.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: The scope of RER is currently being designed to
meet the functional requirements of Electrification. The likelihood of additional infrastructure work
needing to be undertaken within the scope of the Electrification program will relate to risks such
as unexpected utilities diversions and existing infrastructure modifications.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

249

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.12.1.11 Impact on Hydrail Scope of Work due to RER
There is a risk that the RER scope of work could have a negative impact on Hydrail.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring: Medium - The definition of the RER scope of infrastructure and train
services is still evolving and therefore it is likely that changes from the current definition will have
an impact on Hydrail.



Significance: Medium - There may be constraints of the feasible locations for the hydrogen
production and refuelling facilities. Additionally, train service patterns may affect the required
performance characteristics and range of the HFC rail vehicles.



Mitigation: As part of the proposed “Recommended Next Steps” it will be important for the Hydrail
team to continue to work closely with the RER Program team to understand evolutions in the RER
infrastructure scope, fleet strategy and timetable.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: There is no impact on electrification

4.12.1.12 New Emerging Technology by 2025
Technology developments in propulsion systems could create a feasible lower cost alternative to
Hydrail. Continuing innovations in the rail industry could usurp the Hydrail option. As an example,
battery-only trains are also being tested in various parts of the world. With the significant level of
funding and research into battery technology from major automotive companies, a breakthrough in
that sector is possible.


Type: System Design



Probability of Risk Occurring: Low - It has been suggested that battery-only trains could be a viable
alternative to Hydrail. However, there are fundamental issues with the power to weight ratios of
battery systems that mean they are unlikely to be an appropriate solution for a heavy demand
commuter network like GO. In addition, the research improvements in battery technologies that
are frequently publicized are unlikely to be commercially available within the time frames required
by RER.



Significance: Low - Although battery only technology might become a viable propulsion system
for rail vehicles in the future this is likely to be limited to light rail vehicles.



Mitigation: The Hydrail team will continue to monitor industry and technology trends to assess
whether the likelihood of occurrence of this risk changes.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: The same risk applies to electrification.

Table 4-54 collates the risks identified above and orders them using a rough risk ranking score of
Probability multiplied by Significance, based on High = 3, Medium = 2 and Low = 1.
The risks that have score from 6 to 3 are of sufficient importance that their further investigation is
included within the scope of activities outlined in the “Recommended Next Steps” section.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

250

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-54 HYDRAIL SYSTEM DESIGN RISK MATRIX
Risk

Probability

Significance

Risk Score

Regulatory Framework for HFC Rail Vehicles

Medium

High

6

Private Sector Risk Assessment of Hydrail

Medium

High

6

System Integration Complexity of the HFC Rail Vehicles

Medium

Medium

4

Operational Range of the HFC Rail Vehicles

Medium

Medium

4

Performance of the HFC Rail Vehicles

Medium

Medium

4

Environmental Assessments

Medium

Medium

4

Impact on Hydrail Scope of Work due to RER

Medium

Medium

4

Infrastructure Required for Hydrail

Low

High

3

Technological Development of Hydrail

Low

Medium

2

Model-related Risks

Low

Medium

2

Implications to RER Scope of Work due to Hydrail

Low

Medium

2

New Emerging Technology by 2025

Low

Low

1

4.12.2 System Implementation Risks
4.12.2.1 Public Perception of Hydrogen
Misconceptions by the public about the safety risk ofhydrogen might cause commuters and local
neighbourhoods to resist the implementation of Hydrail.


Type: System Implementation



Probability of Risk Occurring: Medium – This is based on current perceptions of hydrogen.
However, a focused public relations effort should be able to mitigate this risk.



Significance: Medium – Negative perceptions of safety risks could adversely impact on the location
of hydrogen production and storage facilites and GO ridership levels.



Mitigation: Engage with Metrolinx public relations and communications teams to overcome these
prejudices, using a comprehensive public engagement strategy.



Comparative Assessment with Electrification: Electrification does not have this same risk.

4.12.2.2 Uncertainty Regarding Rate at which HFC Rail Vehicles can be
Introduced into Revenue Service
There is a risk that the duration between the DBFOM contract award and the planned start of the
enhanced RER services is insufficient to fully develop, test and deliver the required HFC rail vehicles.


Type: System Implementation



Probability of Risk Occurring: Medium - Since HFC technology of the scale required for Hydrail has
not previously been integrated into a rail vehicle this risk relates to system integration, train control
