
194

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

governments within Canada. This model follows the flow of purchases of local goods by companies, as
well employees, support sales, jobs, and tax revenues across Canada. The StatCan model is used by the
public sector, private-sector businesses and other researchers and is based on widely accepted
methodology for estimating these types of economic linkages.
The multipliers in the StatCan model are based on the Leontief matrix, which estimates the total economic
requirements for every unit of direct output in a given industry using detailed interindustry relationships
documented in the input-output model. The input-output framework connects commodity supply from one
industry to commodity demand by another. The multipliers estimated using this approach capture all of the
upstream economic activity and backward linkages related to an industry’s production, by attaching
technical coefficients to expenditures. These output coefficients (dollars of demand) are then translated
into dollars of GDP, labour income and number of employees, based on industry averages. The analysis will
primarily use the most recent economic multipliers developed by StatCan, currently as at 2013.
The primary benefit of this approach is that the model can be built with a reasonable degree of
accuracy, particularly in view of the limited economic data available for Hydrail. The limitations of this
approach are that:


The analysis assumes constant production functions, labour-capital ratios, and productivity.
Therefore, it is predicting future economic impact on the current economy.



This approach does not allow for differences in the cost of capital to result in capital-labour substitution.



The impact of a tax policy change on an industry cannot be directly predicted. For example,
I-O models contain no information that allows the user to estimate the impact of a 10 percent
investment tax credit on the level of investment. An external estimate of the amount of investment
that would be stimulated by the tax credit would be required as in input to the model.



I-O models do not predict the cross-border flow of capital or population changes.

The I-O Model provides a framework for assessing the order of magnitude of the potential financial and
economic impacts that might arise from alternative assumptions related to the Hydrail and overhead
electrification systems. The impact estimates produced by the I-O Model are subject to a very wide range of
assumptions, all of which can have an important bearing on the results obtained. As such, it is important to
understand that the model is not a forecasting tool but rather a simulation framework for obtaining, in a
structured and organized manner, a sense of the impacts that may arise from the wide range of alternative
assumptions adopted.
The I-O Model incorporates assumptions concerning the building of either system (including, among
other things, location, size and productivity) with a calculation framework for estimating the resulting
financial and economic impacts. In setting the initial estimates for the model parameters, we have made
use of data gathered from several sources, including past economic impact studies and StatCan inputoutput models, as well as real estate, construction and transit industry experts.
To generate estimates of the financial and economic impacts, the Economic Impact Model incorporates
numerous assumptions regarding the two systems. These key inputs include:


Location of CAPEX



The jurisdiction wherein the equipment is built



The value of construction costs and operating costs

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

195

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.7.1.2 Limitations due to Data Inputs
The assumptions that are associated with the inputs and the impacts that these assumptions could
have on the outputs are detailed below (Table 4-43). Where there was uncertainty or lack of detail
certain assumptions had to be made about the inputs. These assumptions are also detailed.
TABLE 4-43 LIMITATIONS DUE TO DATA INPUTS
Input
Costs

Description, Assumptions, Limitations
All costs include design, labour, contractors and materials.
Assumptions: Each cost item was assumed to have a mix between these four components to estimate the
impact in different industries.
Limitations: The ultimate results will be impacted slightly as each industry, product and service has
different economic impacts.

Labour Costs

All inputs related to labour costs represent total compensation costs, which typically include related items
such as vacation pay, medical and dental benefits, life insurance, and employment assistance programs.
Assumptions: Benefits, termed SLI in the I-O model, are based on the StatCan model for each service
type, and varies industry to industry. SLI includes EI, and health and life insurance.
Limitations: The assumptions across all labour costs may result in different direct labour impacts and
direct employment, as the rate of benefits can differ between unionized workers and non-unionize
workers, part-time, full-time and temporary workers, thereby causing a potential difference in the output
values.

Material
Costs

Material Costs are described by their underlying commodity.
Assumptions: Based on general knowledge of the underlying items, major categories of commodities
were used.
Limitation: The ultimate results will be impacted by the commodity applied as each commodity has
different economic impacts.

Location of
suppliers

At this stage, the business case does not specify the suppliers of the material and services, therefore it is
not possible to definitively determine whether the material and service providers are located in Ontario,
Canada or internationally.
Assumptions: The StatCan model dictates, based on its historical data whether the underlying commodity
is wholly or partially produced in Canada or internationally
Limitations: The location of the material is a significant assumption. Given that design specifications have
yet to be determined for either technology, it is difficult to determine where materials will be purchased.
For both technologies, there are limited categories and historical information in Canada to realistically
indicate the mix of supplier locations. The actual supply mix will impact the result, with a negative impact
being more international purchases. The output will provide the direct impact on Ontario. We have
considered the inputs from all of Canada.

Industry
categories

Industry categories are based on operating or capital activities rather than the industry categories used
by Statistics Canada.
Assumptions: Each cost, based on the knowledge provided and with the assistance of StatCan, was
placed into a specific SUPC required by the StatCan model.
Limitations: There may be variances between the SUPC chosen and the actual SUPC of the underlying
commodity or service. Assumptions may have been made for the proper categories of OPEX and CAPEX
for both systems to fit within the framework of the StatCan model. This was necessary for Hydrail because,
while there is an existing hydrogen industry, the industry in Canada is relatively small. As such, StatCan
does not necessarily have individual classifications for the relevant capital components or related
services.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

196

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Input
Base Year

Description, Assumptions, Limitations
Costs are in 2014 values, and represent the impact for 60 years, while the StatCan model uses 2013 data.
Assumptions: Inputs have not been adjusted for the difference in the base year.
Limitations: The economic impact is as at 2013 and will vary from the impact in the 60-year timeframe.
The results could vary significantly due to the length of the project cost period.

Notes:
EI = employment insurance
SLI = supplementary labour income
SUPC = Supply Use Product Classification

4.7.1.3 Business Model Results
Financial Costs and Assumptions for Overhead Electrification
The operating and capital costs as reflected in the IBC model and relevant assumptions are
summarized below (Table 4-44). Values are presented in 2014 dollars.
TABLE 4-44 OPERATING AND CAPITAL COSTS AND RELEVANT ASSUMPTIONS
Operating Costs
Crew Costs

NPV
($M)
1,479

Description of line item
Train operators
Assumption: Includes 15 percent benefits

Diesel Fuel

691

Diesel fuel

Electricity for Traction

521

Electricity

Rolling Stock Maintenance

2,255

Vehicle Maintenance of the locomotives in use
Assumption: Includes 15 percent benefits

Infrastructure Maintenance

1,217

Includes track maintenance, signal maintenance and overhead line
maintenance. Annual incremental infrastructure maintenance is 1 percent of
track CAPEX. Annual incremental signaling maintenance is 1 percent of
signaling CAPEX. Annual OHLE maintenance is 2 percent of OHLE CAPEX.
Assumption: Repairs costs relative to capital costs are the same as operating
costs.

User Charges –

404

Plant & Roadway
Other

User Charges for trains to run on CN/CP tracks
Assumption: Proxy to land leasing costs

5,710

Includes dispatching costs; other operational costs such as wayside power for
diesel trains when not in use; administrative costs; facilities such as
headquarters, maintenance facilities, layovers and layover berths; and
administrative costs including MX Corporate, GO Execs and GO Customer
Service.
Assumption: Material cost includes contractors/professional fees - 8 percent,
insurance - 2 percent and materials - 24 percent (electricity - 19 percent, Gas - 4
percent, water - 1 percent).

Total Operating Costs
Infrastructure

12,277
4,093

Includes station modifications, guideway and track costs. This includes costs for
rough grading, excavation, fencing bridge deck, noise walls, rail/road grade
separations. Includes all construction materials and labour regardless of who will
perform the work. Includes 15 percent engineering design, 50 percent
contingency and 25 percent accelerated mark-up.
Assumption: Metal and construction grade make up 80 percent of material costs.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

197

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-44 OPERATING AND CAPITAL COSTS AND RELEVANT ASSUMPTIONS
NPV
($M)

Operating Costs
Electrification capex

1,762

Description of line item
As associated with electrification-related systems, includes all construction
materials and labour regardless of who will perform the work. Includes 40
percent overhead catenary, 35 percent signal immunization, 15 percent
electrification substations, 10 percent station modifications for electrification,
bridge rework for electrification and electrification of sidings.
Assumption: Wires and transformers are 85 percent and 15 percent is for regular
construction.

Property

Includes professional services associated with the real estate component of the
project. These costs may include agency staff oversight and administration, real
estate and relocation consultants, legal counsel, court expenses, and insurance.

221

Assumption: 60% is the actual property cost, 35% is for consultants, and 5% is for
insurance.
Carparking

624

Parking, includes 15% design costs.

Fleet

4,105

Rolling stocks costs for RER fleet and GO 5-Year Plan. 84 4-car EMU to be
acquired in 2024 which the diesels are retired. No more
acquisitions/replacements after 2044.

Other network CAPEX

2,137

As associated with all other systems, include all construction materials and
labour regardless of whom is performing the work. Include signal prioritization
at intersections. Include passenger information systems at stations and on
vehicles (real time travel information; static maps and schedules). Include
equipment to all communications among vehicles and with central control.
Include fare sales and swipe machines, fare counting equipment. Includes 15
percent engineering cost and 50 percent contingencies.

Total CAPEX

12,942

Financial Costs and Assumptions for Hydrail
The Hydrail System is assumed to maintain the same level of service and delivery as proposed for RER.
To isolate the true differences between Hydrail and overhead electrification, only the cost items that
are directly and explicitly impacted by Hydrail are altered from the IBC model to the Hydrail
simulation model. The three line items impacted are described in Table 4-45.
TABLE 4-45 OPERATING AND CAPITAL COSTS AND RELEVANT ASSUMPTIONS
Costs

NPV ($M)

Description

Electric Traction
Power – Hydrail

1,299

This line item represents the electricity requirement of the system under Hydrail.

Infrastructure
Maintenance

1,534

In the RER model, this refers to the maintenance and renewal of the overhead
electrification lines. This includes an allowance of 2 percent of the capital costs of
overhead line electrification per year per.
In the Hydrail model, these overhead lines do not exist. The costs therefore are
associated with maintenance of the hydrogen infrastructure, and is estimated at
10 percent of the capital costs.
Since there is a portion of the infrastructure that is similar to overhead electrification,
such as guideways and signaling, there are assumptions built in to the breakdown
of the costs for the I-O Model that these costs would remain the same.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

198

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-45 OPERATING AND CAPITAL COSTS AND RELEVANT ASSUMPTIONS
Costs

NPV ($M)

Description

Hydrail Capex

2,658

This includes the cost of production facilities, pipelines, storage tanks, storage
compressors, refill tanks, refill compressors and dispensing infrastructure.

Fleet

3,927

This includes costs for rolling stock, excluding HFC costs, which are covered under
Hydrail Capex.

4.7.1.4 Economic Impacts
RER will generate a wide range of financial and economic impacts on the province, including:


Incremental growth in the Province’s GDP arising from the construction and the ongoing
operation of either an overhead electrification or Hydrail Syste



The creation of new employment during the construction and ongoing operation of either system

Gross Domestic Product
The analysis considered the direct and indirect tax revenue that each level of government may
potentially receive as a result of Overhead Electrification and Hydrail in Ontario (Table 4-46). The
results indicate that RER implementation will positively impact GDP, with Hydrail being expected to
generate approximately $2.6B more in GDP than overhead electrification.
TABLE 4-46 GDP IMPACTS
($000)

Overhead Electrification

Hydrail

Operations

$72,455,685

$72,596,379

Capital152

$12,631,935

$15,150,014

Total

$85,087,620

$87,746,393

Employment Levels
The analysis indicates that during the construction and operational phases of RER, implementation
through overhead electrification can be expected to lead to the creation of 429,031 Full-Time
Equivalent (FTE) jobs, while implementation through Hydrail can be expected to lead to the creation
of 427,734 FTE jobs (Table 4-47). FTE is the ratio of the average number of paid hours during a period
(part time and full time) by the total number of working hours in that period. In other words, one FTE is
equivalent to one employee working full-time. The FTE job metric is measured in person-years, as in
the number of FTE per the hours required on an annual basis to qualify as such.
Table 4-47 EMPLOYMENT (FTE)153
Overhead Electrification

Hydrail

Operations

320,170

340,876

Capital

108,861

131,858

Total

429,031

472,734

152 Input and Investment Total Impact, Closed Model
153 Total Impact, Closed Model; includes the direct, indirect and the induced impacts.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

199

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The FTE job numbers are likely overstated since I-O is a static model and does not incorporate
dynamic macro variables such as, labour force, population, wages, and salary growth over time. Using
2014 dollars, it is likely that over the life of the project, wages and salaries, labour supply constraints,
and more generally, business cycles, would impact the number of FTE per the proposed OPEX and
CAPEX, and likely overstate the number of FTE jobs.

4.7.2

Qualitative Assessment

A consideration of the qualitative, non-financial and/or social aspects of the Hydrail is necessary to
fully understand the impact of Hydrail relative to overhead electrification. The government is
accountable to the community and its use of public funds. Therefore, all benefits and costs must be
considered (where possible and as practical) to ensure the best option for the community is
progressed, even if the option is not optimal in financial terms.
A role of government is deliver public goods and services such as community transit. These projects,
by addressing public issues, result in many qualitative, but significant impacts. These must be
identified, considered and assessed for an informed government decision to occur.
Social impacts refer to the effects of an activity on the well-being of communities and people. Due to
this broad definition, for the purposes of this study we have sought to only identify and discuss those
qualitative and/or social impacts that are unique to the use of Hydrail, as opposed to electrification of
the system in general, or other methods of powering rail.
We have broadly identified three core areas of qualitative impacts that are important to consider
alongside the financial results when determining the long-term feasibility of Hydrail:


Industry impacts



Environmental impacts



Community impacts

Each of the above identified areas are discussed in the sections that follow. The discussion focusses
on the nature of the impact (that is, positive or negative) rather than the extent of such impact.

4.7.2.1 Industry Impacts
Fuelling Innovation and the Hydrogen Economy
While the hydrogen and fuel cell sectors in Canada is growing in Canada, it still represents a very
small percentage of the country’s GDP. An investment in Hydrail will lead to growth in not only this
sector, but also other sectors that support the Hydrail System, such as the automotive, oil and gas and
power and utilities sectors.
Though the broader economic impacts of this investment have been considered, it is also important
to note the qualitative or social benefit of growth of the hydrogen and fuel cell sectors. It is expected
that a decision to use Hydrail for RER would act as a catalyst and drive interest and activity in the
sector, due to the arising need for supporting infrastructure. Further to this, Hydrail can facilitate the
establishment of infrastructure to also facilitate the deployment of hydrogen and fuel cell technology
in other areas of transportation. This would incentivize an increase in research and development
(R&D), drive innovation and technology improvements. These activities will create the right economic
conditions or climate to stimulate demand for further investment in this industry and technology.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

200

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Skilled Workers
Our economic impact analysis indicates that, relative to overhead electrification, Hydrail will create
over 40,000 more jobs across a range of industries. While a clear economic benefit, it is important to
note the qualitative benefits associated with this growth. This investment in technology that is
relatively new to the province would support and drive the up-skilling of labour, resulting in more
Ontarians becoming skilled technicians available to construct, deploy, maintain and repair a Hydrail
System. It is however noted that a significant and immediate investment will have to made to train the
required workforce, such that skilled labour is available as required for Hydrail deployment, and to
limit the need to import labourers.

4.7.2.2 Environmental Impacts
Full Electrification of the GO Network
As noted in Section 4.2.1.2, the current plans for electrification of the GO network do not include the
Richmond Hill and Milton lines nor do they include the extremities of the Kitchener and Lakeshore
West lines. These rail lines or sections were not included because of concerns of flooding along the
Richmond Hill line and complexities surrounding obtaining approval for installation of an OCS along
rail lines or sections that are not owned by Metrolinx.
Hydrail, however, eliminates or reduces these concerns, thereby allowing for the full electrification of
the GO network. The environmental impact of this is significant, as there would be a further reduction
in GHG emissions with the full phasing out of diesel fuelled rail vehicles. All other benefits of
electrification relative to diesel will also extend to these rail lines or sections, thereby increasing the
overall benefit of the RER program.
Supporting renewable energy
Hydrogen has the potential to support the generation and supply of renewable energy. Hydrogen can
act as an energy storage medium, thereby allowing for renewable energy, such as solar and wind
energy, to be captured when available and stored. Stored energy can then be used to generate
electricity at times when market would otherwise demand exceeds supply.
The increase in research and development activity generated from the deployment of Hydrail in
Ontario, will likely lead to increased knowledge and innovation in respect of the use of hydrogen as
an energy storage medium. This could lead to wider benefits accruing to the benefit because of
increased access to clean energy. The province could also benefit from reduced cost of delivering
electricity to Ontarians, as energy storage options allow for increased ability to the maximize the use
of existing renewable energy generating facilities, thereby deferring investments in new infrastructure.
Noise
The construction of an overhead catenary system that extends across the GO network will generate
noise and vibration during the construction phase, which are likely to disrupt local residents. The level
of disruption is expected to be less with Hydrail, noting that there would be relatively minimal
construction activity associated with the development of hydrogen infrastructure.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

201

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.7.2.3 Community Impacts
Availability and Reliability
During the construction phase, disruptions to transportation caused by the construction of an OCS
may have long term consequences, particularly given longer commute times, with higher than usual
congestions on roads, highways, and subways as commuters seek alternative transportation options.
These factors would ultimately negatively impact economic productivity.
During the operations phase, no differences are expected between overhead electrification and
Hydrail in terms of availability and commuter waiting times. As discussed in Section 4.2.1.2, each
locomotive will be prepared for service in an identical manner, with no difference with regards to the
dispatching timeline. In the initial roll-out of the project however, delays may occur as employees or
technicians would take some time to advance along the learning curve. As such, maintenance or
servicing of a HFC-powered rail vehicle will likely require greater time than for vehicles powered by an
OCS. This time off the track for maintenance or servicing may disrupt schedules and thus cause
commuter delays, which would translate into reduced productivity.
Initiative to Transition Ontario to a Hydrogen Economy
The introduction of Hydrail on the GO network can serve as a launching pad for the establishment of a
hydrogen economy in Ontario, as described in Section 4.9.1. This could in turn have far reaching
socio-economic benefits across the province.
As has been noted in the preceding sections of this study, hydrogen has a variety of different uses in
industry, with significant annual production levels globally. Within the transportation sector, hydrogen
can be used to fuel vehicles and, where derived from clean sources, allows for a significant reduction
in the level of GHG emissions historically generated from transportation. As part of a global
imperative to reduce GHG emissions, several governments, including the Ontario government, have
allocated funding to facilitate the transition to hydrogen and other clean energy sources for
transportation.
Ontario’s expertise in the development of HFCs and the generation of clean energy, can be leveraged
to support the transition to clean fuel sources in Ontario and beyond, and also support the local
production of hydrogen for other industrial purposes. A significant barrier has been the necessary
investment in infrastructure to support the adoption of hydrogen fueled vehicles.
The scale of operations needed to fully support the GO network, can serve to attract initial
investments to develop, and later expand hydrogen generation, storage, distribution and fuelling
facilities, along with HFC production facilities within the province. These investments can lead to the
broader application of hydrogen as a fuel in other areas of transportation, including other forms of
public transportation such as buses, streetcars and subways services; municipal fleets such as school
buses and garbage trucks; commercial fleets; and private motor vehicles. Such wide scale application
can in turn lead to an increasing demand for skilled labour along each step of the supply chain, and
the potential for increased production of the various components within the province. This will spur
other indirect and induced impacts throughout the economy.
Ontario is already recognized as a global leader in the development of HFC technology and in the
generation of clean energy. The development and accumulation of skills and knowledge to support
the hydrogen supply chain within Ontario will eventually also position the province as a thought
leader in hydrogen technologies. Ontario will be able to export its expertise to other regions looking
to transition to clean fuels for transportation, thereby increasing the economic benefits associated
with Hydrail.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

202

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Given the global drive to reduce GHG emissions, the opportunities for the application of hydrogen as
a fuel source for transportation are significant. To date, there has however been low penetration of
hydrogen in transportation globally. Ontario’s early adoption and development of relevant skills and
knowledge therefore presents significant opportunities to propel the local economy, and to facilitate
the global transition to clean energy.

4.7.3

Conclusion

The quantitative analysis presented indicates that Hydrail is expected to have a slightly greater
economic impact than overhead electrification, in respect of the ability to spur job creation and GDP
growth. The benefits of Hydrail are enhanced when considering other benefits as described in the
qualitative analysis. In particular, the potential for the development of a hydrogen economy in Ontario
has not been quantified, but as discussed, the resulting impacts would be significant. Further to this,
there are other key societal benefits to be derived from the ability to electrify the full GO network, and
the enhanced ability to support renewable electricity generation and clean fuels across all modes of
transportation. These additional benefits suggest that the province will realize greater socio-economic
benefits using HFC to power trains on the GO network.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

203

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.8

Public Acceptance

While Canada is a global leader in the development of HFC technology, there has been little
application of the technology in transportation in Canada. As discussed in Section 4.10, most
applications in public transportation fleets or in passenger vehicles have occurred in British Columbia.
Ontario has seen application of the technology on a much smaller scale, but only in powering forklifts.
Accordingly, there is limited experience with hydrogen as source of fuel among average citizens, who
best know hydrogen for its combustive properties.
Hydrail deployment in Ontario will involve the creation of hydrogen generation and storage facilities
within the province, possibly in proximity to residential and commercial centres, and the operation of
passenger trains with reservoirs of hydrogen onboard. Given the likely perception of hydrogen as a
highly combustible gas, should a Hydrail deployment be pursued, a robust public education
campaign would have to be designed and implemented. The campaign should facilitate a high
degree of comfort around the safety of hydrogen for use in transportation in general, and in
passenger rail operations in particular.
The most wide-scale implementation of hydrogen and HFC technology in transportation in North
America has come with the development of the California Hydrogen Highway Network (CaH2Net or
the Hydrogen Highway). There are limited cases of the use of HFC technology in passenger rail across
the globe, with the most relevant and advanced case being the planned German deployment of
HFC-powered trains into full service, across five states, in 2018.
This section provides an overview of the public engagement strategies employed in California and
Germany, and recommends steps to be taken to facilitate public acceptance of a deployment in
Ontario.

4.8.1

The California Hydrogen Highway154

In April 2004, the Governor of California signed Executive Order S-7-04, calling for the creation of the
Hydrogen Highway in response to the need to diversify the state’s sources of transportation energy,
while also providing environmental and economic benefits.
The Executive Order (EO) called for:


The designation of California’s 21 interstate freeways as the CaH2Net



The planning and build-up of a network of hydrogen fuelling stations along these roadways and in
the urban centres they connect so that by 2010, every Californian will have access to hydrogen
fuel



The acceleration of progress in hydrogen use through public incentives and financing
mechanisms



The promotion of economic development opportunities resulting from increased use of hydrogen
for stationary and mobile applications

The development was being pursued over three phases, as demonstrated in Table 4-48.

154 California Environmental Protection Agency. 2005. California Hydrogen Blueprint Plan – Volume 1. May. Accessed November 2017.
http://www.casfcc.org/2/StationaryFuelCells/PDF/CA percent20Hydrogen percent20Highway percent20Blueprint percent20Volume
percent201_050505.pdf
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

204

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-48 HYDROGEN HIGHWAY DEVELOPMENT OVERVIEW
Phase

1

2

3

50 – 100

250

250

Light-duty FCVs and ICEVs

2,000

10,000

20,000

Heavy-duty FCVs or ICEVs

10

100

300

5

60

400

Stations

Stationary and off-road vehicle applications
Notes:
ICEV = internal combustion engine vehicle

Phase 1 was to be implemented over a 2-year period, and Phase 3 was expected to be complete
by 2010.
An EO Team was formed to manage the development of a California Hydrogen Blueprint Plan (the
Blueprint). The Blueprint, which initially focussed on Phase 1 of the implementation, was developed
through a process of partnership and cooperation with stakeholders.
The EO Team was counselled by a Senior Review Committee, consisting of senior state government
officials, and an Implementation Advisory Panel, which consisted of high-level representatives from
industry, California State agencies, federal and local government agencies, academia, and public
advocacy groups. In addition to this, volunteer experts across an array of government agencies,
private industry, academia, and environmental organizations provided detailed technical, financial,
and policy inputs across five topic teams, namely:
1. Rollout Strategy
2. Societal Benefits
3. Economy
4. Implementation
5. Public Education
The Blueprint presented a series of findings and recommendations for the development of the
Hydrogen Highway.
Today, there are approximately 29 open-retail and 4 on-retail hydrogen fuelling stations in operation
in California, with 37 more stations scheduled to be opened by the end of 2017. As of April 2017,
there were over 1,600 active registrations of FCEVs155. The sections that follow describe the public
education strategy recommended by the Marketing, Communications, and Public Education Topic
Team (Topic Team) as part of the development of the Blueprint.

155 Air Resources Board. 2017b. 2017 Annual Evaluation of Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Deployment and Hydrogen Fuel Station Network
Development. California Environmental Protection Agency. August. Accessed November 2017.
https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/zevprog/ab8/ab8_report_2017.pdf

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

205

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.8.1.1 Marketing, Communications, and Public Education Topic Team
Report156
In its report to the EO Team, the Topic Team emphasized that public education would be a key factor
to the success of the Hydrogen Highway, noting the importance of the public understanding the
reasons for the initiative and being supportive of it. The Topic Team asserted that key groups would
have to be engaged, and active public education, marketing, and communications campaigns would
be essential. Early engagement was also considered important, to avoid misinformation causing
negative views to take hold.
While it was recommended that one key message be communicated across all stakeholder groups, it
was also deemed necessary to identify key messages and action steps for each group. The key groups
identified and messages suggested are summarized in this section.
Key Groups

Technology and Industry Enablers
Companies, industry associations, labour organizations, and research institutions will need to facilitate
technology advancements and commercial installations. They will need to recognize the business
opportunities that a hydrogen economy presents, and help to communicate to the wider public on its
merits.

Government, Policymakers, and Policy Influencers
The advancement of hydrogen technology and the installation of hydrogen infrastructure will require
the support of this group to create the necessary policies and regulatory environment. This group will
have to be educated on hydrogen and hydrogen technology, particularly in regards to the safety of
hydrogen’s production, delivery, and use, as well as the potential benefits of a hydrogen economy.

Consumers, Customers, and News Media
The general public should be educated such that they understand that using hydrogen in
transportation is consistent with other sustainability policies. The public education campaign should
allow for the public to become familiar and comfortable with hydrogen, understanding that is it as
safe as other fuels, and that HFC-powered vehicles have the potential to deliver performance and
utility similar to other vehicles.
For communities where hydrogen fuelling stations will be installed, there should be early and
concentrated efforts at the local level. This will engender a sense of pride in having hydrogen
programs in these communities, before fear and opposition, based on a lack of knowledge, sets in.

Education Community
It was recommended that a sustained program, covering basic concepts related to hydrogen and fuel
cells, be incorporated into curriculum guidelines throughout all levels of California’s education
system. Community colleges were also recognized as playing an integral role in the development of a
workforce to support the hydrogen economy, so it was recommended that they incorporate hydrogen
and sustainable technology in their programs. It was also suggested that universities, colleges, and

156 Air Resources Board. 2005. Marketing, Communications, and Public Education Topic Team Report, California 2010 Hydrogen Highway
Network. California Environmental Protection Agency. January 5. Accessed November 2017.
https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/zevprog/hydrogen/documents/historical/pubedreport.pdf

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

206

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

research institutions expand their roles in the training of engineers, scientists, business leaders, and
policymakers to support the hydrogen economy.
Key Messages
It was recommended that the communication strategy be centralized, directed, and coordinated at a
senior policy-making level to support success. Additionally, for each key group identified, a single,
visible, and accessible point of contact should also be identified.
To the greatest extent possible, joint participation between industry, government, nongovernment
organizations (NGOs), and academia was encouraged, as this would demonstrate the depth of
support for the hydrogen economy. It was, however, noted that care should be taken in developing
communications and public engagement programs, so that unrealistic expectations are not created
that would threaten public and political support.

4.8.2

The German Experience

The German Federal Government had set 2030 objectives to reduce CO2 emissions by 55 percent
and generate 50 percent of electricity from renewable sources. In view of this, there was strong
industry and public interest in reducing emissions along rail routes.
Roughly 50 percent of the German rail network is not electrified; however, overhead catenary
construction was considered to be too capital intensive, negatively impacting profitability on some
sections of the network. Further to this, overhead catenary lines were not desirable in scenic areas,
where the necessary infrastructure would detract from the landscape. Electric trains, powered by HFC
technology, were seen as an interesting and promising option to reduce emissions, develop a
hydrogen industry, and meet stakeholder expectations.
Germany has a long history with hydrogen in transportation. The German government has identified
hydrogen and fuel cell technology as essential to the future of mobility and energy supply. In 2002,
the Clean Energy Partnership (CEP) was established, as a joint venture (JV) between government and
industry, to test the suitability of hydrogen as a fuel157. In 2006, the government, industry, and science
established the 10-year National Innovation Programme for Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology (NIP)
to facilitate the development of these technologies and provide support for initial products.
Fuel cell hybrid buses have been in operation in Hamburg, Germany since 2011 and in Stuttgart,
Germany since 2013. The government has also formed partnerships with car manufacturers since
2003. In 2007, the first set of hydrogen-powered vehicles were handed over to customers. Today,
there are over 400 cars in operation in Germany. The German government has pledged continued
support of innovations in HFC technology for use in various transportation sectors, including buses,
transportation, and rail.
The first hydrogen filling station went into operation in Berlin in 2004, and there is currently a network
of 32 hydrogen fuelling stations in operation in Germany. These stations were sponsored by the
German government through the NIP. Germany plans to have 100 filling stations in operation by 2018
and as many as 400 by 2025, supported by an investment of €350 million by the German
government158.
Since 2008, the CEP has been engaged in intensive public relations activities, aimed at effectively
anchoring hydrogen in the public consciousness as a fuel and energy store. A long-term
157 Clean Energy Partnership (CEP). 2017a. "What is the CEP." Clean Energy Partnership. Accessed October 2017.
https://cleanenergypartnership.de/en/clean-energy-partnership/what-is-the-cep/
158 CEP Review 2002-2016
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

207

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

communication plan was developed for defined target groups, with various tools used to engage
each group, including print and web-based communication, appearances at trade fairs, viral films,
social media activities, Campus Days at select universities, and test drive events.

4.8.2.1 Government’s Role in Using Hydrogen in Transportation
The National Organisation Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology (NOW) was founded in February 2008
as a federally owned company. It was established to:


Administer the programs for NIP and electro-mobility on behalf of the Federal Ministry of
Transport



Act as an interface for the strategic alliance of government, the scientific community, and industry



Allocate public funding and to create synergies in the industry



Act as a competency and public education centre

NOW’s management is supported by a Supervisory Board and an Advisory Board. The Advisory
Board has the task of providing both content and technical consultation support to the management
of the program partners for NIP implementation. The board comprises representatives from
18 interest groups, across government, science, industry, and infrastructure.
The NIP was specifically created to facilitate product and process innovations. It also facilitates
partnerships across government, industry, and academia. The NIP was initially funded by the Federal
Ministry of Economics and Technology (14 percent), the Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital
Infrastructure (36 percent), and industry partners (50 percent). The Federal Ministry of Transport and
Digital Infrastructure has also contributed up to €500 million for industry-led research projects.
FIGURE 4-46 NATIONAL ORGANISATION HYDROGEN AND FUEL CELL TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW

The Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure intends to invest approximately
€250 million in Phase 2 of the NIP by 2019159. Under Phase 2, the ministry is promoting the
competitiveness of technically mature products.

159 CEP Review 2002-2016
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

208

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.8.2.2 NOW’s Role in Hydrail Development in Germany
In 2014, the Federal Ministry for Transport and Digital Infrastructure, through the NIP, committed
€7.9 million in support of the development of HFC-powered rail vehicles, with the first prototypes
expected to go into test service operation by the end of 2016. The government’s support was based
on the view that electricity-based fuels from renewable energy were key for sustainable mobility, and
also allowed for new job creation in Germany.
The vehicles were to be developed and manufactured by train manufacturer, Alstom, in the
company’s competence centre for regional trains in Salzgitter, Germany. The German states of Lower
Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Baden-Württemberg, and Hesse had signed Letters of Intent for the
purchase of HFC-powered train sets.
NOW also commissioned a study to assess the feasibility of the use of HFC to propel trains in Germany.
The research examined the technical, legal, and economic requirements for hydrogen integration into
existing rail infrastructure. The study showed that deploying HFC trains is economically feasible in
principle. A public engagement roadmap was produced as a part of the study.
Even though by 2016 there was already a high level of public acceptance of hydrogen-fuelled
transportation in Germany, a government-led public relations, education, and stakeholder
consultation campaign for Hydrail was key. As a part of the public engagement plan, a Fuel Cell
Electro-mobility in Rail Transportation symposium was jointly held by NOW, Alstom, and Lower
Saxony’s Ministry for Economy, Labour and Transport in 2016.
The symposium was intended to lay the foundation and bring greater focus on the topic of Hydrail
among key players from government and industry. The event focussed on technical issues on both the
vehicle and infrastructure sides, and considered national and European transportation strategy
policies and perspectives of various transportation service providers. A second symposium was held
in 2017, where a model HFC train was made available for test rides.

4.8.2.3 Regional Governments’ Roles in Hydrail Development in Germany
German regional governments control the public transit authorities; accordingly, their commitment to
purchase HFC-powered trains through signing Letters of Intent was a significant driving force behind
the development of the technology for trains. Aside from the environmental benefits, the regional
governments recognized the potential for job creation and economic development. As at
March 2017, Alstom had signed Letters of Intent to purchase a total of 60 trains from the German
states of Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Baden-Württemberg, and the Hessian transport
association Rhein-Main-Verkehrsverbund160.
Political leadership was also instrumental in public acceptance of the technology. They provided
support by being at the forefront of public engagement and consultation.

4.8.3

Differences between Ontario and the California and German
Deployments

In California, there had been some familiarity with the use of hydrogen as a fuel when the Blueprint
was initiated. At the time, there was an estimated 39 stations either planned or in existence in the
state, and 200-300 light-duty FCVs were already being provided as part of existing industry and
government programs. Further to this, the scale of hydrogen production needed to support the
160 Alstom. 2017. "Alstom’s hydrogen train Coradia iLint first successful run at 80 km/h." Press Centre. March 14. Accessed November 2017.
http://www.alstom.com/press-centre/2017/03/alstoms-hydrogen-train-coradia-ilint-first-successful-run-at-80-kmh.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

209

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

planned vehicle deployment across the state was small in comparison to the scale required to support
RER, as planned in Ontario. Another significant difference lies in the timeline to full deployment. The
CaH2Net has now been in active development over a 12-year period, and while there have been
successes, the level of deployment of hydrogen-fuelled vehicles has not reached 20,000, which is the
goal set in the Blueprint for realizing full-scale commercialization of hydrogen and fuel cell
technologies.
In Germany, public engagement was consistent and strategic over roughly 6 years prior to the
decision to pursue the use of HFC to power passenger trains. Familiarity with hydrogen and HFC
technology had advanced to the point where it was easier for the public to assess the advantages and
risks of Hydrail relative to overhead electrification.
In the Ontario context, public engagement will have to play an even more significant role in a Hydrail
implementation plan, particularly given that the starting point in respect to public awareness and
acceptance of the technology is vastly different. This is especially important within the context of very
vocal communities that are significantly empowered at the municipal level. Provincial mandates are
often actively challenged, and the strong opposition of activists within communities can force plans to
be abandoned, where the province is unable to engender the support of community members.

4.8.4

Recommendations for Ontario Deployment

Should Hydrail be pursued in Ontario, it will be important to identify all stakeholders across federal
and local government bodies, communities, political representation, industry, academia, labour
groups, environmental groups, media, and any other key groups.
A clear communication plan should be developed and promptly implemented. The plan should
outline the reasons for pursuing Hydrail, take a balanced approach to outlining the rationale within
the context of competing technologies, and directly address the risks and challenges presented by
Hydrail deployment. It is recommended that there be consultation and dialogue with key
stakeholders, using surveys, community meetings, symposia, and demonstrations. These methods
have been identified as key success factors in California and in Germany.

4.8.4.1 Key Themes
Similar to the German example, the key themes of the approach should address the five phases of
hydrogen use for rail:


Production



Transport



Storage



Fuelling



Usage

The key themes at each of the phases are further broken into five subject areas:


Safety



Sustainability



Environmental



Economics



Reliability, as described in this section

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

210

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Safety
The safety of the technology, systems, and processes is likely to be of significant concern to the
public. Controls across the five phases, as well as mechanisms to prevent leakages and to minimize
the impact of systems failures or human error, should be strongly emphasized. Where possible,
opportunities should be provided for the public to experience the technology, a key example being
the demonstrations and test rides that were offered to members of the public in Germany.
Given that safety concerns will largely centre on the supply and storage of hydrogen, the public
should be educated on the long history of the generation and use of hydrogen in various processes
across industry. Existing safety standards and the industry’s track record in meeting the standards set
should also be highlighted.
Sustainability
With the increased focus on sustainability in transportation, the public will likely be interested in the
sustainability of Hydrail, relative to both diesel and overhead electrification. This should not only
consider the ultimate source of hydrogen, but also the sustainability of the hydrogen supply chain. As
discussed in Section 4.3, Ontario’s electricity system should accommodate the supply of relatively
clean electricity to produce hydrogen through electrolysis. Further consideration should, however, be
given to the carbon footprint of other processes, such as the supply of water and the transportation of
hydrogen. The additional benefit of being able to electrify the full GO network (including the Milton
and Richmond Hill lines) should be considered, and the sustainability of the full Hydrail system
assessed in comparison to traditional diesel and electrification, using a well-to-wheel approach.
Environmental
The installation of overhead catenaries across the GO network will require the removal of
approximately 2.5 km2 (square kilometres) of trees; therefore, will have a significant negative
environmental impact, in addition to the visual impact of wires strung across the province’s landscape.
While Hydrail will not have a similar impact, concerns will likely be raised about the environmental
impact of potential leakages or spills, particularly at hydrogen storage sites or during transportation.
Environmental stakeholders and regulators will have to be engaged, and a level of comfort provided
around mechanisms that will be in place to prevent spills or leakages, or to limit the environmental
impact where spills or leakages cannot be prevented. The ability to comply with existing standards
will have to be demonstrated, and the need for additional standards emerging from the establishment
of Hydrail and related services will have to be assessed.
Economics
Given the size of the RER project, the public is likely to have strong concerns about the economic
benefit of any plan to electrify the network. These concerns will likely be magnified in considering the
use of HFC technology, given that the technology has had limited application in passenger rail, with
no instances of application on the scale being considered in Ontario. A decision to pursue Hydrail will,
therefore, have to be supported by robust financial and economic assessments that demonstrate the
merit of RER in general, and the use of HFC technology as opposed to traditional electrification.
The economic benefits should also be assessed within the context of the broader socio-economic
benefits of Hydrail. Hydrail creates the strong potential for increased economic activity within the
province to support the five phases of hydrogen use, as well as the production of HFCs. These
benefits should be highlighted, with a clear demonstration of provincial, commercial, and institutional
plans to support the training and development of workforces to support the full supply chain.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

211

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Reliability
Particularly within the context of the cost of a Hydrail implementation and the cost of failure, public
engagement will have to facilitate a high degree of comfort around the reliability of HFC technology
and the hydrogen supply chain.
While there is a long history of electrification in public transit for buses, streetcars, and subway trains,
HFC has had relatively limited application in public transportation. This will generate concerns around
the long-term prospects for the technology. The public should also be aware of Canada’s role in the
development of the technology, and government and industry sponsored initiatives to improve the
technology, as discussed in Section 4.9. This will allow for comfort around the level of commitment
from government and industry to the continued development of HFC technology.
There are limitations in respect to current hydrogen fuelling technology that should also be
adequately addressed, with a clear demonstration of the ability to overcome challenges. Further to
this, concerns will arise around the hydrogen supply chain, given the limited examples of large-scale
production and storage of hydrogen. There should be a clear demonstration of the scalability of
hydrogen technology along each step of the supply chain and the market’s capacity to support
Hydrail in Ontario.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

212

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.9

Implementation Readiness

This section provides an assessment of technological readiness at present, describes expected
changes to the maturity of the technology, and considers competing technologies. This assessment
forms the basis for the rest of the report.
The section also provides an overall assessment of the readiness of the industry to support Hydrail
deployment in Ontario, including hydrogen generation, storage, transportation, and fuelling, as well
as fuel cell technologies. This section also discusses deficiencies and what may be required to ready
the industry should there be gaps.

4.9.1

Hydrogen Economy161

Hydrogen can, in principle, replace all forms of energy in use today and serve all sectors of the
economy. The fundamental attraction of hydrogen over fossil fuels is its potential environmental
advantages. At the point of use, hydrogen can be burned, or it can be converted to electricity in a fuel
cell, producing no harmful emissions. If hydrogen is produced without emitting any GHGs, it could
form the basis of a truly sustainable energy system – the hydrogen economy.
In a world that has transitioned to the hydrogen economy, an efficient and competitive hydrogen
production, storage, and transportation system has been built; and hydrogen has become widely
accepted as a clean, safe, and sustainable form of energy. A hydrogen economy could be as follows:


Hydrogen is produced through electrolysis using electricity derived solely from nuclear power or
renewable energy sources, or through thermochemical or biological techniques based on
renewable biomass. Produced hydrogen is burned in highly efficient gas turbines to provide
electricity, or is piped to customers. Hydrogen is also used to store the intermittent energy
generated from wind turbines and photovoltaics.



Highly efficient hydrogen-powered vehicles are used to convey people and goods. Most of these
vehicles refuel at public stations fed by centralized hydrogen production facilities. Small-scale
natural gas reformers or renewable-energy-powered electrolysis plants are also used at home or
in the workplace to produce the hydrogen required for filling on-board hydrogen tanks.



Home owners have the choice of buying electricity from the grid or supplying their own energy
needs using hydrogen with a dedicated fuel cell that provides electricity and thermal energy for
heating and cooling.

Like any other product, hydrogen must be stored, transported, and transferred to bring it from
production to final use (Figure 4-47). While production and final use has been the focus of attention
for many years, the infrastructure required to store, transport, and transfer the hydrogen for final use
in a hydrogen economy is not fully developed or is nonexistent in many jurisdictions, including
Ontario.

161 United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2006. The Hydrogen economy, a non-technical review. Paris: Division of Technology,
Industry and Economics (DTIE). Energy Branch.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

213

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-47 HYDROGEN ECONOMY

Hydrogen Economy
Hydrogen
Production

Storage
(compressed gas, liquefaction, hydrides)

Distribution

Hydrogen Use

(pipelines, road, rail, ship)

Transfer
Various governments around the world have developed policies and provided funding to kick-start
development of the required infrastructure for the hydrogen economy. This section provides a
summary of the required infrastructure in other jurisdictions.

4.9.1.1 California Hydrogen Highway Network162
The CaH2Net was initiated in April of 2004 to support and catalyze a rapid transition to a clean,
hydrogen transportation economy in California. The goal was to assure that hydrogen fuelling stations
were in place to meet the demand of fuel cell and other hydrogen vehicle technologies being placed
on California’s roads.
The CaH2Net was the first point of coordination between the California government, academia, and
private industry stakeholders, establishing a shared vision in the form of a Blueprint describing the
actions needed to create a hydrogen highway. The 2004 Blueprint identified four main principles that
would contribute to the achievement of CaH2Net:
1. The CaH2Net should be developed in phases.
2. The State should co-fund the early phases of station deployment.
3. Hydrogen produced as a transportation fuel should be in line with the State’s environmental goals.
4. The State should establish policies that help create a favourable business climate for establishing
hydrogen infrastructure.
The Government of California has introduced following policies and funding programs to support
hydrogen transportation initiatives:


Staff from the California Air Resources Board, California Energy Commission, and the Governor’s
Office of Business and Economic Development, along with other state agencies, closely
coordinate and work with other government and industry stakeholders to implement actions that
support the development of a robust hydrogen and FCEV market.



Assembly Bill 8 (AB 8) provides a specific focus on development of the state’s hydrogen fuelling
station network. AB 8 dedicates up to $20 million per year to support continued construction of at
least 100 hydrogen fuel stations.



Executive Order B-16-201211 provides another strong policy driver for accelerating
commercializing FCEVs and their associated hydrogen fuel station network.



The State of California is co-funding the initial network of hydrogen fuelling stations, in advance of
vehicle launches, through the Energy Commission’s Alternative and Renewable Fuel and Vehicle
Technology Program.

162 Air Resources Board. 2017a. California's Hydrogen Transportation Initiatives. California Environmental Protection Agency. October 27.
Accessed November 2017. https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/zevprog/hydrogen/hydrogen.htm
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

214

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

As of April 5, 2017, more than 1,600 FCEVs had active registrations with the California Department of
Motor Vehicles. Drivers of these early market cars can fuel at 29 Open-Retail stations, nine of which
are new fully retail fuelling stations completed in the last year alone. Revised projections, based on
improved understanding of issues facing certain station developers’ project timelines, show
37 stations total are expected to be open by the end of the year (including retail and non-retail)163.
According to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (Air Products), one of the hydrogen suppliers to
California fuelling stations, the hydrogen supplied to the stations can be delivered to a site via truck or
pipeline164. It can also be produced by natural gas reformation; biomass conversion; or electrolysis,
including electrolysis driven by renewable energy sources, such as wind or solar.
In response to the development of hydrogen infrastructure in California, the following
announcements by the fuel cell and hydrogen industry were made in 2017, illustrating the expansion
of fuel cell and hydrogen technology in several transportation applications:


Honda’s 2017 Clarity fuel cell sedan launched in early 2017, with an estimated range of
590 kilometres (km). Honda and GM also established the auto industry’s first joint venture (JV) to
mass produce a HFC system for use in future products in both companies165. Hyundai and
Genesis unveiled a concept design for FCEVs, and Kia announced plans for bringing a new FCEV
model to the market in 2020166.



Air Products announced that it will now be able to offer hydrogen for FCEV fuelling at a price of
less than $10 per kilogram (kg) at its five stations in California167. Air Products cites advances in
fuelling station and hydrogen distribution technology, as well as projected FCEV deployments as
enabling factors in reaching this pricing milestone.



A 30 percent reduction in storage tank cost could be achieved by using a new steel hydrogen
storage tank product (developed by Nippon Steel and Sumitomo Metal Corporation) that
promises a cost savings compared to conventional carbon fibre-wrapped tanks168.



United Parcel Service (UPS) announced that its first prototype fuel cell extended-range delivery
van, developed in collaboration with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), will be deployed in the
third quarter of 2017169.

163 Air Resources Board. 2017b. 2017 Annual Evaluation of Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Deployment and Hydrogen Fuel Station Network
Development. California Environmental Protection Agency. August. Accessed November 2017.
https://www.arb.ca.gov/msprog/zevprog/ab8/ab8_report_2017.pdf
164Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (Air Products). 2017. “Air Products’ California Fueling Stations Offering Hydrogen Below $10 Per
Kilogram.” News Release. Lehigh Valley, Pa. March 6. Accessed November 2017. http://www.airproducts.com/Company/newscenter/2017/03/0306-air-products-california-fueling-stations-offering-hydrogen-below-$10-per-kilogram.aspx
165 Abuelsamid, Sam. 2017. “GM Teams Up With Honda To Manufacture Fuel Cells Near Detroit. Autos/#UnderTheHood.” Forbes. January
30. Accessed November 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/samabuelsamid/2017/01/30/gm-and-honda-form-joint-venture-tomanufacture-fuel-cells-near-detroit/#2d388c438a93
166 Greimel, Hans. 2017. "Kia fuel cell vehicle to arrive in 3 years
Hyundai brand to launch technology first." Automotive News. April 3. Accessed November 2017.
http://www.autonews.com/article/20170403/OEM04/304039933/kia-fuel-cell-vehicle-to-arrive-in-3-years
167 Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (Air Products). 2017. “Air Products’ California Fueling Stations Offering Hydrogen Below $10 Per
Kilogram.” News Release. Lehigh Valley, Pa. March 6. Accessed November 2017. http://www.airproducts.com/Company/newscenter/2017/03/0306-air-products-california-fueling-stations-offering-hydrogen-below-$10-per-kilogram.aspx
168 The Asahi Shimbun Company. 2017. "Cost of hydrogen tanks cut by 30 percent for stations for fuel-cell vehicles." Asia & Japan Watch.
March 12. Accessed November 2017. http://www.asahi.com/ajw/articles/AJ201703120003.html
169 https://www.pressroom.ups.com/pressroom/ContentDetailsViewer.page?ConceptType=PressReleases&id=1493730807330-217

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

215

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT



Toyota unveiled a proof-of-concept demonstration for a fuel cell truck-and-trailer combo powered
by two Mirai fuel cell stacks with a range of 320 km170.



Truck manufacturer Kenworth also announced the development of a truck prototype for use in
Southern California ports, integrating Ballard fuel cell stacks171.



Nikola Motor Company (Nikola), a new truck manufacturing company, unveiled its Class 8 overthe-road semi-truck with a range of up to 1,900 km. Nikola’s offering is also unique in that
commercial leases will include hydrogen fuel, provided by a network of nationwide stations the
company is planning to develop172.

4.9.1.2 Germany
According to a study that looked at the prospects of providing hydrogen as a fuel by 2050, hydrogen
could cover up to 40 percent of the demand for energy in Germany’s transport sector by 2050173.
Industry, science, and government have recognized the potential advantage of hydrogen and fuel cell
technology for clean mobility, and are working on the market preparation of these technologies
through strategic alliances. The National Organisation Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology (NOW) is
responsible for the coordination and management of the National Innovation Programme for
Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology (NIP) and the Electromobility Model Regions programme of the
Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure (BMVI)174, as follows:


NOW’s primary task is to initiate and evaluate projects, and bundle them in an appropriate manner
to benefit from potential synergies.



NOW also incorporate subjects, such as production technology, education and training, and
public relations, to raise the public profile of these technologies and related products.



NOW is also commissioned by the BMVI to support the continued development of the Mobility
and Fuel Strategy, as well as implement the EU Directive 2014/94/EU on the development of
alternative fuels infrastructure (CPT).

NOW is coordinating the development of 50 hydrogen refuelling stations within the scope of a
carefully monitored process. To support the rapid roll-out of refuelling station infrastructure in
metropolitan areas and along main transport roads, H2 Mobility (a JV founded by six industrial
partners, Air Liquide, Daimler, Linde, OMV, Shell, and TOTAL in 2015175) will establish and operate
the first 100 hydrogen refuelling stations by 2018 or 2019 unconditionally and irrespective of the
number of vehicles using the stations. This will mean developing up to 10 stations in each of 6 major
metropolitan areas in Germany (Hamburg, Berlin, Rhine-Ruhr, Frankfurt, Stuttgart, and Munich) and
establishing hydrogen corridors along motorways. The second phase of the project will be aligned

170 Toyota. 2017. “Toyota Opens a Portal to the Future of Zero Emission Trucking.” News Releases. April 19. Accessed November 2017.
http://corporatenews.pressroom.toyota.com/releases/toyota+zero+emission+heavyduty+trucking+concept.htm.
171 Kenworth. 2017. Kenworth Advances Low - Zero Emission Prototype Projects on T680 Day Cab Drayage Trucks for Southern California
Ports. News Releases. May 2. Accessed November 2017. https://www.kenworth.com/news/news-releases/2017/may/advanced-prototypeprojects/
172 Nikola Motor Company. 2016. "Nikola One Truck Revealed Tonight @ 7:00 p.m. MST Class 8 zero-emission hydrogen-electric truck in
production by 2020." News Releases. December 1. Accessed November 2017. https://nikolamotor.com/pdfs/December_1_Release.pdf
173 H2 Mobility. 2017a. H2-Stations. Accessed November 2017. http://h2-mobility.de/en/h2-stations/
174 https://www.now-gmbh.de/en/about-now/aufgaben
175 H2 Mobility. 2017b. Missing Hydrogen Infrastructure. Accessed November 2017. http://h2-mobility.de/en/h2-mobility/

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

216

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

with the number of FCVs on the road. By 2023, a total of 400 refuelling stations would provide
nationwide coverage across Germany.
H2 Mobility receives funding from BMVI within the framework of the NIP, as well as from the European
Commission through the second phase of the FCHJU as part of the Hydrogen Mobility Europe
Project, and the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T CEF) as part of the Connecting Hydrogen
Refuelling Stations programme176.

4.9.1.3 South Korea177
The Korean Government has committed to building a national hydrogen infrastructure, pledging to
have 100 fuelling stations in operation by 2020 and 230 stations by 2025. Korean stations are fully
financed by the local and national governments, with local cities and regions owning and operating
them.
In June 2017, Nel ASA (Nel, a dedicated hydrogen company headquartered in Norway) entered into
an agreement with Deokyang Co., Korea’s largest hydrogen supplier, to establish a JV for exclusive
sale and marketing of Nel’s hydrogen fuelling stations in Korea.

4.9.1.4 Plan for Hydrogen Economy in Japan and South Australia
Japan178
First articulated in a 2014 blueprint, the vehicle and infrastructure advances would position hydrogen
at the centre of Japan’s everyday energy needs. The government envisions:


Small hydrogen plants at homes and businesses



A nationwide hydrogen distribution system



Big advances in deployment and scale that would dramatically reduce vehicle and fuel prices



The establishment of a carbon-free hydrogen manufacturing process

If the government’s plans succeed, there will be 800,000 FCEVs on Japanese roads by 2030
(compared with just 1,700 today) along with a network of 900 filling stations to serve them.
The government and industry are pushing together, with heavy subsidies flowing in support of
corporate hydrogen projects, and businesses fully committed to seeing the government's vision
through. One motivation for the collaboration is to raise Japan’s image as global clean-energy leaders
ahead of the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. Another is the goal for energy independence in a
country that depends on imports for nearly all of its oil. Hydrogen holds special promise for resourcepoor Japan because it can be produced from a wide variety of sources, including natural gas, coal,
biomass, solar or wind power, nuclear power, and hydro stations.

176 ibid.
177 Nel ASA (Nel). 2017. Nel ASA: Enters Korean hydrogen market through JV with Deokyang. June 30. Accessed November 2017.
http://mb.cision.com/Main/115/2300162/695161.pdf
178 Greimel, Hans, and Naoto Okamura. 2017. "Japan dreams of a hydrogen society. As automakers join effort, will they lead the world or
be left behind?" Automotive News. April 24. Accessed November 2017.
http://www.autonews.com/article/20170424/OEM06/304249965/japan-dreams-of-a-hydrogen-society

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

217

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

South Australia179
On September 8, 2017, the South Australian Government announced a hydrogen roadmap for South
Australia. The government’s vision is to accelerate South Australia’s transition to a clean, safe, and
sustainable producer, consumer, and exporter of hydrogen. The government highlighted the
following actions that will be taken to support the hydrogen economy:


Support early investment in hydrogen infrastructure, including co-investment in a demonstration
project for hydrogen production and use under the $150 million Renewable Technology Fund;
create demand for hydrogen through government leadership; incentivize investment in hydrogen
infrastructure; and provide up-to-date information on the potential for hydrogen technology
projects.



Promote and enhance the attractiveness of head office location, equipment distribution, and
servicing and manufacturing in South Australia, including using the $200 million Future Jobs Fund
to target job creation in the emerging hydrogen sector, and encouraging automotive industry
diversification along the supply chain.



Deepen relationships with key trading partners, particularly with Asia-Pacific trading partners.



Unlock hydrogen innovation, including support for commercialization of home-grown
technologies, facilitation of research and industry partnerships, and continued encouragement in
developing clean technology and renewable energy expertise.



Create a strong regulatory framework for hydrogen production, storage, and use through
providing a fair, predictable, and trustworthy regulatory framework.

4.9.1.5 Conclusion
The hydrogen economy is envisioned as a truly sustainable energy system that, if the hydrogen is
produced from zero-emission energy sources, has the potential advantage of producing no harmful
emissions. A hydrogen supply chain is the cornerstone of any jurisdiction’s efforts to build a hydrogen
economy. Additionally, in all cases studied, government funding and policy has been essential to the
development of a hydrogen economy.
As other jurisdictions take steps to advance the use of hydrogen for transportation and industrial uses,
there is a real opportunity for Ontario to contribute to leading global innovation in the development
of the hydrogen supply chain and hydrogen-powered applications. To date, the focus of international
governments has been hydrogen applications related to passenger cars and other on-road vehicles,
but an opportunity exists for larger transportation applications.
If Ontario chooses Hydrail as the technology for the GO RER network, significant demand for the
hydrogen supply chain would be created immediately, unlike in other jurisdictions where demand is
expected to follow the supply of infrastructure. This, in addition to existing Canadian expertise in
hydrogen technology, could transform Ontario into a centre for hydrogen technology innovation
globally.

179 Government of South Australia. 2017. A Hydrogen Roadmap for South Australia. Accessed November 2017.
https://service.sa.gov.au/cdn/ourenergyplan/assets/hydrogen-roadmap-8-sept-2017.pdf
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

218

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.9.2

Overview of Hydrogen Related Businesses

Depending on the procurement approach that is adopted it is likely that a combination of an
industrial process contractor and a rail vehicle manufacturer will be responsible for designing and
building the Hydrail System.
The design and supply of Hydrail’s subsystems and components would be undertaken by specialist
businesses located in Ontario, Canada and throughout the world. As part of the feasibility study the
team spoke with and received information from a broad section of these businesses to understand
their current capabilities and their expectations of where their industry is headed.
All the businesses expressed a strong interest in being part of the Hydrail Program and confirmed
their capabilities and capacities to meet our potential requirements.
The table below contains a list of businesses that have capabilities in the following areas:


Supply and distribution of hydrogen;



Supply of tanks for the storage of liquid and gaseous hydrogen;



Supply of refuelling systems;



Supply of electrolyzers and fuel cells;



Supply of batteries;



Testing and systems integration services.

Some of the businesses are multi-national in size and provide services in Canada. Other businesses
are based in Canada (highlighted below in Table 4-49). These are all smaller in size, although
businesses such as Hydrogenics and Ballard have a global portfolio of completed and current
projects. However, for these Ontario and Canadian based companies to benefit from the
implementation of the Hydrail System there would be the need for them to expand their current
production capacities.
We believe that this is achievable given that there will be design and development phase of the
program that will last several years, however it is an area that we intend to investigate in more detail
during the next phase of the study.
TABLE 4-49 LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS IN THE HYDROGEN BUSINESS
Organization

HQ location

Main Focus of the Business in Relation to Hydrogen

Air Liquide

Paris, France

Production and distribution of gaseous assets (argon,
oxygen, nitrogen, helium and hydrogen) to large
industries and healthcare sectors

Air Products

Allentown, Pennsylvania, US

Supply of LNG process technology and equipment;
atmospheric and process gases and related equipment to
manufacturing markets (including refining and
petrochemical, metals, electronics, and food and
beverage)

AKASOL

Darmstadt, Germany

Battery manufacturing

Bae Systems - HybriDrive

London, UK

Hybrid electric power and propulsion transit solutions

Ballard

Burnaby, BC

Fuel cell power solutions for transit, automotive, rail,
infrastructure and defence sectors

Change Energy Services

Oakville, ON

End-to-end compressed gas fuelling solutions

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

219

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-49 LIST OF ORGANIZATIONS IN THE HYDROGEN BUSINESS
Organization

HQ location

Main Focus of the Business in Relation to Hydrogen

Chart Industries

Garfield Heights, Ohio, US

Design and manufacturing of highly engineered
cryogenic equipment

Clean Fuel Systems

Brampton, ON

Hydrogen systems integration

Electrovaya

Mississauga, ON

Development and manufacture of portable lithium-ion
battery power solutions for the automotive, power grid,
medical and mobile device sectors

Enbridge Gas

Toronto, ON

Natural Gas Distribution

General Motors

Detroit, Michigan, US

Design, manufacturing, market and distribution of flexible
fuel cell electric platforms with autonomous capabilities
for the automotive and military industries

Hexagon Composites

Aalesund, Norway

Supply of composite pressure cylinders and systems for
gas applications

Honda

Tokyo, Japan

Design, manufacturing, market and distribution of flexible
fuel cell electric platforms for the automotive industry

HTEC

Vancouver, BC

Build and operation of renewable electrolysis and
industrial by-product streams facilities for hydrogen
production

Hydrogen In Motion

Vancouver, BC

Mobile hydrogen storage tanks for the automotive
industry

Hydrogenics

Mississauga, ON

Industrial and commercial hydrogen generation, fuel cells
and energy storage solutions

Hyundai

Seoul, South Korea

Design, manufacturing, market and distribution of flexible
fuel cell electric platforms for the automotive industry

ITM

South Yorkshire, UK

Integrated hydrogen solutions manufacturing

Linde

Munich, Germany

Production, storage and distribution solutions, as well as
dispenser manufacturing, fuelling stations and
infrastructure for hydrogen fleet applications

NATECH

Jean-sur-Richelieu, QC

High-performance battery and charger solutions

NEL

Oslo, Norway

Hydrogen delivering solutions to produce, store and
distribute hydrogen from renewable energy

Next Hydrogen

Mississauga, ON

Water electrolysis

Powertech Labs

Surrey, BC

Testing and research of utility generation, transmission
and distribution power systems

Toyota

Toyota, Japan

Design, manufacturing, market and distribution of flexible
fuel cell electric platforms for the automotive industry

Tugliq Energy

Montreal, QC

Alternative energy infrastructure (wind, LNG and
hydrogen) for Northern communities

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

220

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.9.3

Hydrogen Fuel Cell Rail Vehicle Market Maturity and
Trajectory

The maturity of HFC-powered rail vehicles has moved from chatter and speculation to become a
serious contender to wayside electrification and diesel power. Conversations about HFC rail vehicles
are also starting to shift away from lack of ready resources of hydrogen, performance and range
anxiety to project analysis and studies to deploy HFC locomotives in an effective manner.
Germany, for example, has started to invest in a hydrogen generation plant and hydrogen distribution
networks since 2002. The German government identified hydrogen and hydrogen-fuel-cell
technology as essential to the future of mobility and energy supply. In 2002, it established the Clean
Energy Partnership as a joint venture between government and industry to test the suitability of
hydrogen as a fuel. Germany, like Ontario, has an energy mix that favours green energy. Surplus
energy is continually used to generate hydrogen. In response to favourable market environments like
Germany, all over the world, major rail vehicle manufacturers have made significant investments in
HFC technology.
Alstom’s Coradia iLint is the most well-known example of a rail vehicle that uses HFC technology. The
Coradia iLint, successfully completed its test run on its own track in Salzgitter, Lower Saxony,
Germany. Alstom plans passenger test runs in early 2018. Several German states have signed letters
of intent to buy the trains once Alstom puts them into production which is expected to be in 2019.
East Japan Railway (JR) demonstrated the world’s first hydrogen hybrid commuter train to the public
in 2006. JR’s New Energy Train (NE Train) has two 65-kw PEM fuel cells and can travel up to 60 mph
for approximately 60 miles. The NE Train uses regenerative braking, common to hybrid cars, to
recharge the battery pack. In addition, the NE Train consumes 20 percent less fuel than traditional
trains. The NE Train was designed to travel to more remote regions of Japan that do not have
overhead power cables to replace both electric trains and diesel locomotives.180
More recently, Siemens and Ballard have partnered together to develop a fuel cell version of the
Siemens’ Mireo EMU. Ballard has also engaged with CCRC Tangshan to develop a hydrogen power
version of a LRV. Trials began on a dedicated test track in October 2017.181
BNSF Railway and Vehicle Projects converted a GG20B locomotive to an experimental testbed, for the
use of HFCs. The new locomotive was designated HH20B. The locomotive was publicly demonstrated
for the first time on June 29, 2009, at Topeka, Kansas and was built initially for the CP, but was not
delivered, due to the cancellation of the order. It was sold to BNSF in 2008, and shipped to the
railroad's shops at Topeka, Kansas for conversion. The diesel generator set was removed, and the fuel
cell power unit was installed in its place. Hydrogen storage is in a set of tanks installed in a heavily
vented enclosure on top of the locomotive's long hood, above the batteries.182
Sifang Co., a subsidiary of China South Rail Corporation (CSR) successfully presented the world's first
hydrogen-powered tramcar at an assembly facility in Qingdao. With over 60 seats and the ability to
carry up to 380 passengers, the tram can be refilled with hydrogen in only three minutes and can run
distances of up to 100 kilometers at a maximum speed of 70 kilometers per hour.183 184.
180 http://www.hydrogencarsnow.com/index.php/Hydrail/jr-east-demonstrates-worlds-first-commuter-hydrogen-train/
181 http://www.railjournal.com/index.php/rolling-stock/siemens-and-ballard-to-develop-fuel-cell-train.html
182 http://www.trainweb.org/gensets/owners/bnsf1.html

183 http://en.yibada.com/articles/21142/20150321/china-worlds-first-hydrogen-fueled-tram.htm#
184 https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-03-25/china-s-hydrogen-powered-future-starts-in-trams-not-cars
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

221

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.10

Commercial

This section seeks to identify options and a recommended approach to commercial structures and
procurement processes to support Hydrail deployment on the GO network. This entails an
assessment of the possible contractual arrangements for the following factors:


Purchase of rolling stock



Supply, generation, and transportation of hydrogen



Fuelling of trains



O&M of trains and train storage facilities



O&M of hydrogen generation and storage infrastructure

Consideration is given to appropriate risk transfer mechanisms and the effective bundling of services.
The section also contemplates the most effective procurement methods for the aforementioned
services, with a view to achieving the best value, as well as the impact on the existing plans for
procurement through RER Package 3.

4.10.1 Current RER Procurement Strategy and Impact of Hydrail
Delivering on RER plans will involve the procurement of services related to the operations and
maintenance of trains, services along the railway corridor (on-corridor), and services outside of the
corridor (off-corridor).
On-corridor works are primarily related to the installation of fixed infrastructure, such as
communications-based train control, signalling, radio and data communications, and track upgrades,
as well as maintenance of all elements. On-corridor works will also include the electrification of the
GO network, requiring the installation of overhead catenaries to allow for trains to be powered. The
associated capital costs are significant, including costs related to, inter alia, the relocation of utilities,
the acquisition of property access rights/property acquisition, environmental assessments and bridge
upgrades. The maintenance of the overhead catenary system will also cause further costs to be
incurred over the concession period. Off-corridor works are primarily related to upgrades to existing
stations and parking infrastructure, as well as the development of new stations and parking
infrastructure.
As currently envisioned, off-corridor works will be procured through separate contracts. Given the
complexity and inter-relation of train operations and on-corridor services, it has been recommended
that, in keeping with international best practices, train operation services and on-corridor works and
services will be delivered through a single, integrated design, build, finance, operate, maintain
(DBFOM) contract.
While Metrolinx will continue to be responsible for customer facing activities, the on-corridor
concessionaire (OnCo) will be responsible for the operation and maintenance of trains. OnCo will
procure electric train sets and undertake the necessary on-corridor infrastructure works. At a defined
date following award of the DBFOM contract, OnCo will also take over the operation and
maintenance of existing trains, and on a go-forward basis, be responsible for the operation and
maintenance of trains along with on-corridor infrastructure.
Within the context of the current RER procurement plans, Hydrail can create both opportunities and
risks/costs. Some of the key features of the existing procurement plans and the related impact of
Hydrail are discussed in the following sections.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

222

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.10.1.1 On-Corridor Works
Procurement
Based on current electrification plans, the capital cost of the on-corridor infrastructure works is
estimated at $7B, with a further CAPEX on rolling stock of $2B. Some parts of the work are being
procured and constructed in advance of the commencement of the DBFOM contract. The size of the
capital infrastructure in the proposed DBFOM contract will therefore likely constrain the field of
bidders that will be able to meet the requirements of Metrolinx and finance providers to secure
construction performance for a project of this magnitude. Further to this, over the proposed 30-year
concession period, the DBFOM contract will require flexibility to accommodate changes in service
levels and the service plan.
A decision to pursue Hydrail could eliminate the requirement to install overhead catenary wires,
resulting in a significant reduction in the overall on-corridor project scope and cost. This cost saving
may be partially offset by the additional costs of establishing a hydrogen supply chain. However, the
hydrogen supply chain capital costs would lie outside the RER DBFOM contract, and the reduction in
the DBFOM capital costs could potentially allow for a greater number of bidders who could meet the
necessary construction security requirements, thereby providing an opportunity for increased
competition.
Though the scope of the DBFOM contract would be reduced with the pursuit of Hydrail, Hydrail and
the use of HFC technology presents enhanced technology risk relative to overhead electrification.
While this risk may, at least partially, be passed on to the ProjectCo, proponents will assign a value to
the risk they are assuming and ultimately incorporate this value in their bids. Further to this, there are
likely to be less companies interested in taking on the level of technology risk presented, which could
limit the field of bidders.
System Service Specifications
The RER system service specifications will define, inter alia, capacity, service frequency and average
journey times. Service levels will be set based on Metrolinx’s projections over the concession period.
The service specifications will provide the framework in which OnCo proponents will decide the
infrastructure and rolling stock that will allow for a maximum service level to be achieved. It is
expected that the project agreement will allow Metrolinx to purchase capacity and train service levels
based on its projections, on which basis OnCo will procure and commission the required rolling stock
and infrastructure. It is expected that OnCo will design infrastructure to meet the projected 2044
service requirements. The associated capital costs would be paid over the concession period through
availability payments.
Service levels could be varied at Metrolinx’ discretion with appropriate notice to OnCo. Capacity
levels could be increased with appropriate notice. This will allow Metrolinx to determine the pace at
which infrastructure will be expanded/upgraded and allow flexibility in train service levels over the
concession period. The pursuit of Hydrail will likely create greater flexibility for Metrolinx to increase
the system’s capacity level, as less changes would be required to fixed infrastructure. In this case,
increasing the system’s ability to supply increased power to trains is expected to be a simpler and less
expensive process than it would be in the case of overhead electrification.
Procurement Timeline
A Request for Qualifications (RFQ) for the DBFOM contract is expected to be issued in Spring 2018,
and the Request for Proposals (RFP) issued later that year. Financial close is anticipated in 2019, after
which OnCo is expected to begin on-corridor infrastructure works and the procurement of rolling
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

223

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

stock. OnCo is expected to assume current operations at a defined date after 2021 and to provide the
