$m

48

48

0

Powered vehicles

$m

960

515

46

Parameters

The biggest change is in the powered vehicles’ cost, with the locomotives-only option providing a
saving of 46 percent when compared to the initial capital cost of the Hydrail system at the 2024
timeframe using the 2024-costs. The significance highlighted here is an indication to scrutinize this
option of having only locomotives for the Hydrail system, provided the locomotives could achieve a
similar time savings as purported to be achieved using EMUs.
RER Scenario 4 Option
RER Scenario 4 assumes that the entire GO network in the current layout would be electrified and in
2024 timeframe and would have a mix of existing diesel-powered vehicles and hydrogen- or electricpowered vehicles in the fleet. The comparison of results between Scenarios 4 and 5 are provided in
Table 4-25. The addition in the hydrogen, energy, water, and operating requirements for Scenario 4
implies the scope of the full GO network electrification. The additional capital required for the fixed
infrastructure is also significant. Due to the modular nature of the technologies involved, Hydrail
would be implemented in stages while taking advantage of lessons learned while implementing
Hydrail subsystems in the GO corridors initially, so these numbers should be used only for the relative
difference between the scenarios compared.
TABLE 4-25 COMPARISON OF RER SCENARIOS 4 AND 5
RER Scenarios 4 and 5
(Onsite production, gas phase, 7500 HP, 2024, 2024-cost,
Locomotives+EMUs)
Parameters

Unit

RER Scenario 4

RER Scenario 5

Change (%)

Hydrogen required

tpd

59

40

32

Water required

tpd

594

402

32

Electricity required

GWh/d

3.2

2.2

31

Electricity market price

$/MWh

34.2

34.2

0

Electricity cost

$K/d

129

91

30

Water cost

$K/kg

1.8

1.2

32

Hydrogen cost

$/kg

3.4

3.5

-3.4

Total operating cost

$m/y

48

34

30

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

124

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-25 COMPARISON OF RER SCENARIOS 4 AND 5
RER Scenarios 4 and 5
(Onsite production, gas phase, 7500 HP, 2024, 2024-cost,
Locomotives+EMUs)
Parameters

Unit

RER Scenario 4

RER Scenario 5

Change (%)

No. of locomotives

No.

156

70

55

No. of powered EMUs

No.

42

42

0

Land area required

m2

23692

16166

32

Production equipment

$m

311

211

32

Production storage

$m

86

58

32

Refuelling storage

$m

101

68

32

Dispensing equipment

$m

64

48

25

Powered vehicles

$m

1506

960

36

4.2.2.5 Summary of the Hydrail Operational Model Findings
The Hydrail operational model and the maintenance assessment has revealed the following
information:


The model is capable of estimating operational parameters and costs with sufficient rigor that the
improvement in the inputs and assumptions would narrow the error margin.



The costs and cost factors used in this section are for indicative and comparison purposes only.
The actual costs are presented in Section 4.4, along with the BCR.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

125

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3

Electricity Policy and Pricing

Electricity is the flow of electrons from a negatively charged body to a positively charged body113.
Electricity is commonly used in everyday life as a source of energy for a wide range of applications,
including lighting, heating, and powering appliances or other motorized equipment. Power is the rate
(energy amount per time period) at which energy converted (Figure 4-24). The scientific unit of power
is the watt (W), which is equal to one joule (energy amount) per second (time period)114.
FIGURE 4-24 ELECTRIC POWER MEASURES

The amount of electricity that is generated or used over a period of time is typically measured in
kWh115. A watthour is equal to the energy of 1 watt steadily generated or supplied over 1 hour
(Figure 4-25).
FIGURE 4-25 WATT-HOUR MEASURES

Ontario has seen a net increase in electricity production from 2005 to 2015, with production growing
from 156TWh to 160TWh. The growth in production has however, not been met by increased
demand. Changing economic conditions and conservation programs have resulted in non-weathercorrected grid demand116 within the province declining by approximately 10 percent from 151TWh in
2006 to 137TWh in 2015. Accordingly, Ontario currently generates significant surplus electricity,
estimated at 9 percent of Ontario’s net demand in 2016, a major change from the deficits that existed
in the early 2000s.

113 Natural Resources Canada (NRC). 2016. About Electricity. Accessed October 2017. http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/electricityinfrastructure/about-electricity/7359. 114 “Power – Scientific Definition.” UQ.edu.au. The University of Queensland, Australia, n.d. Web. 02
Nov 2017.
114 “Power – Scientific Definition.” UQ.edu.au. The University of Queensland, Australia, n.d. Web. 02 Nov 2017.
115 “Measuring Electricity – Energy Explained, Your Guide To Understanding Energy – Energy Information Administration.” EIA.gov. U.S.
Department of Energy, 10 Feb 2017. Web. 24 Sep. 2017.
116 Non-weather-corrected grid demand has not been adjusted for variations in weather patterns that may impact demand for electricity.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

126

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

As the province seeks to improve efficiencies, plans through to 2035 focussed on improvement in the
alignment between demand and supply of electricity, and continuing conservation initiatives and
demand response programs. The following sections will describe the governance and policy
framework that guide strategic planning for Ontario’s electricity needs; Ontario’s electricity system
and generation capacity; and electricity demand forecasts as well as plans to balance the electricity
system, while limiting investment in additional infrastructure.

4.3.1

Governance, Regulatory, and Management Framework

4.3.1.1 The Ministry of Energy117
The Ministry of Energy (the Ministry) facilitates the development of Ontario’s electricity generation,
transmission and other energy related facilities. One of the Ministry’s top priorities is ensuring that
Ontario’s energy needs are met in a sustainable manner.
The mandate letter from the Premier to the Ontario Minister of Energy (the Minister), dated
23 September 2016, outlines the Minister’s priorities, including:


Taking further action to mitigate the impact of electricity prices on consumers and businesses,
partly through expanding eligibility for the Industrial Conservation Initiative (ICI).



Promoting energy conservation and the adoption of renewable energy.



Supporting the growth of the low-carbon economy and reductions in GHG emissions.



Driving efficiencies and maximizing return on investment from the electricity sector.

If successful, these actions will drive efficiencies, lead to an increasing reliance on renewable energy
and encourage greater levels of energy conservation, thereby reducing electricity demand in lieu of
increasing supply.

4.3.1.2 The Ontario Energy Board118
The Ontario Energy Board (OEB) is Ontario’s independent energy regulator, whose goal is to ensure
the energy system remains sustainable and reliable, and that the energy rights of Ontarians are
protected. The OEB’s mandate and authority come from the Ontario Energy Board Act, 1998; the
Electricity Act, 1998; and other provincial statutes, including the Energy Consumer Protection Act,
2010.
The OEB:


Sets rules for energy companies operating in Ontario



Establishes energy rates



Licenses energy companies



Monitors the wholesale electricity market and energy companies



Develops new energy policies in partnership with the Ministry



Advises the Government of Ontario on energy policy

117 “About the Ministry”. Web. 10 Oct. 2017.Energy.gov.on.ca, 26 Sep. 2016.
118 05 Oct. 2017. “About Us”. OEB.ca. Ontario Energy Board, n.d. Web.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

127

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The OEB assisted the government in the development of the regulatory framework for Ontario’s cap
and trade program, and is also in the process of implementing a five-point plan to redesign electricity
prices (OEB, 2012-2017a).

4.3.1.3 The National Energy Board119
The National Energy Board (NEB) is a federal body that, amongst other things, regulates the construction
and operation of international and designated interprovincial power lines, as well as the import of
electricity. The NEB also authorizes and regulates energy trade through long-term licences, permits, and
short-term orders. The amount of electricity exported cannot exceed limits approved by the NEB.
In performing its duties, the NEB considers the impact of exports on adjacent provinces and fair market
access for Canadians. The NEB reports to Parliament through the Minister of Natural Resources.

4.3.1.4 The Independent Electricity System Operator120
The Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO) manages Ontario’s electricity system, forecasts
the demand and supply of electricity to plan for the province’s future energy needs, promotes
conservation, and operates the wholesale electricity market.
The IESO was established through the Electricity Act in 1998 as a not-for-profit corporate entity.
Through amendments to the Electricity Act on January 1, 2015, the IESO was merged with the Ontario
Power Authority. Through legislation, the Ministry oversees the IESO, which is governed by a Board of
Directors that is appointed by the Province of Ontario. The IESO operates independently of all other
participants in the electricity market.
The IESO forecasts the Ontario’s current, short-term and long-term energy needs, and assesses the
adequacy and reliability of the integrated power system to ensure Ontarians have sustainable
solutions to meet energy needs now and in the future.

4.3.2

Ontario’s Electricity System

Ontario’s electricity system is made up by a network of generation, distribution and transmission
systems that supply electricity across the province (Figure 4-26). The network is part of a larger North
American system, through which Ontario’s network is connected to neighbouring provinces and states.

119 “NEB – Who we are”. 03 Oct. 2017NEB-one.gc.ca. Government of Canada, 01 Dec. 2016. Web.120 Independent Electricity System
Operator (IESO). 2017a. “What We Do.” About the ISEO. Accessed October 5, 2017. http://ieso.ca/en/learn/about-the-ieso/what-we-do.121
“Electricity – Energy Explained, Your Guide To Understanding Energy – Energy Information Administration.” EIA.gov. U.S. Department of
Energy, 21 Nov. 2016. Web. 24 Sep. 2017.
120 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2017a. “What We Do.” About the ISEO. Accessed October 5, 2017.
http://ieso.ca/en/learn/about-the-ieso/what-we-do.121 “Electricity – Energy Explained, Your Guide To Understanding Energy – Energy
Information Administration.” EIA.gov. U.S. Department of Energy, 21 Nov. 2016. Web. 24 Sep. 2017.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

128

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-26 ELECTRICITY INDUSTRY STRUCTURE IN ONTARIO

(Source: Adapted, with permission, from the Hydro One Limited 2016 Annual Report)

The electricity system is described in further detail in the sections that follow.

4.3.2.1 Generation
Electricity is the flow of electrical power or charge produced by converting energy into electrical power.
Energy sources may be renewable or non-renewable. The main sources of renewable energy include
solar, hydro, and wind energy.121 Non-renewable sources include fossil energy sources, such as coal,
oil, and natural gas. Nuclear energy, generated from uranium, is a nonrenewable, nonfossil energy
source.
Historically, Ontario relied heavily on
coal-fired generation. From 2005 to
2015, the province significantly
reduced the level of GHG emissions
from the electricity sector, as installed
coal-fired capacity was wound-down
and replaced with renewable and
natural gas-fired capacity. Ontario’s
electricity is presently generated from
wind, solar, bioenergy, hydro, nuclear
and natural gas-fired resources, with
approximately 90 percent of the
electricity being generated from nonfossil sources.

FIGURE 4-27 ONTARIO’S 2015 ENERGY PRODUCTION

The province’s electricity needs can
vary by as much as 10,000 MW in any
given day. The province’s diverse energy supply mix allows for the management of different resources
to perform different roles to meet its varying electricity needs. Baseload refers to the minimum
amount of electric power delivered or required over a given period of time at a steady rate. A
baseload plant is normally operated to take all or part of the minimum load of a system, and
consequently produces electricity at an effectively constant rate, and runs continuously122. Nuclear
power plants and “run-of-the-river” hydro facilities produce a constant and steady output of electricity
121 “Electricity – Energy Explained, Your Guide To Understanding Energy – Energy Information Administration.” EIA.gov. U.S. Department of
Energy, 21 Nov. 2016. Web. 24 Sep. 2017.
122 “Glossary.” EIA.gov. U.S. Energy Information Administration, n.d. Web. 02 Nov 2017.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

129

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

and are considered baseload generation. Natural gas facilities and hydro generators with reservoirs
for storage allow for variable output, as needed. Peaking generators are relied upon to meet the
peaks on the highest demand days, while intermediate generators work throughout the day, with
output adjusted as demand varies. Wind and solar facilities generate variable output, based on
weather conditions. They are highly flexible in respect of the ability to adjust output, subject to energy
availability, allowing for variable but controlled generation.
A key difference between traditional and variable generators is that traditional generators store their
primary energy source (for example, uranium, water or natural gas) onsite and convert it to energy as
needed. Variable generators on the other hand, can only produce energy when the primary source
(for example, wind or sunlight) is available. As such, the principle challenge with variable energy
sources is that they can regularly drive a mismatch between demand and supply.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

130

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Installed capacity refers to the maximum
possible output of electricity generators
installed within the province’s electricity
system. Actual electricity production may vary
based on the availability of energy sources
and direction from the IESO to adjust output
to efficiently meet energy needs.

FIGURE 4-28 ONTARIO’S 2016 INSTALLED CAPACITY

There is currently over 37,000 MW of installed
capacity within Ontario’s transmission system
and an additional 3,600 MW of generation
capacity within local distribution systems.
Nuclear and renewable sources represent
approximately 74 percent of the installed
capacity and natural gas sources account for
the remaining 26 percent. Actual production
levels are discussed in the section that follow.
Energy Sources

Nuclear
Nuclear energy, generated by splitting uranium atoms, is a non-renewable source of energy. Nuclear
generation is, however, considered sustainable, given significant uranium resources relative to the
rate of use, and the low environmental impact of its use. Nuclear power accounts for approximately
58 percent of the province’s electricity production. There are three nuclear plants, Bruce, Darlington
and Pickering, with 18 generating units in operation within the province.

Hydroelectric
Hydroelectric (or hydro) energy is generated by converting the kinetic or potential energy of water
into electrical energy. Hydro generation is an important component of Ontario’s baseload and
peaking energy mix. Hydro currently accounts for roughly 23 percent of the province’s electricity
production, and is therefore the most significant source of renewable energy. Given the ability to
predict the level of hydro generation throughout any given day and across seasons, hydro is a stable
source of renewable energy.

Natural Gas and Oil
Thermal generating plants generate electricity by burning natural gas. They can quickly adjust output
based on changes in demand, thereby easily meeting peak demand needs or providing back up for
more volatile wind or solar generation. Natural gas is a fossil fuel, and generates GHGs as a byproduct of energy production. The volume of emissions is however, significantly lower than coal-fired
resources. Natural gas and oil now account for roughly 10 percent of the province’s electricity
production.

Wind, Solar, and Bioenergy
Wind, solar and bioenergy now accounts for roughly 9 percent of the province’s electricity
production. The contribution levels are largely attributed to wind energy, as significant government
incentives along with improvements in technology have resulted in greater output and lower unit
costs.
Wind energy generating potential is greatest in the winter and at night. Wind energy generators can
quickly adjust output in response to system requirements. Solar generation is important to Ontario’s
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

131

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

energy mix, with high production levels during the summer peaking hours. Bio energy is produced
either by combusting organic fuel (biomass) or by allowing organic matter to decompose, producing
CH4, which is then combusted to produce electricity. In Ontario, there are abundant sources of
organic matter as a by-product of forestry, agricultural and livestock, and food processing operations,
as well as from municipal waste. The key challenge to the establishment of bioenergy plants is
however, the high capital cost.

4.3.2.2 Transmission
Electricity is produced from generation plants and transmitted across Ontario’s transmission system at
high voltage before being stepped down to lower voltage for delivery to end-users. The province’s
high voltage transmission system consists of a network of transmission lines that are equal to or
greater than 50 kilovolts (kV).
The stability of Ontario’s electricity system depends on supply constantly meeting demand. The IESO
directs the flow of electricity across the grid, balancing demand and supply to ensure stability. Over
the past decade, the Province has focussed on maximizing the use of the existing transmission system.
Accordingly, significant renewable energy resources have been added without any major expansion
of the transmission network. The network is, however, nearing capacity, and now has limited ability to
accommodate additional generation.
Further constraints are presented when resource potential is not located within proximity to the grid,
as is the case for many of the Province’s untapped renewable energy sources. Significant new
transmission additions typically require a lead time of 7 to 9 years; therefore, the management of the
transmission system requires careful planning.
Capacity constraints lead to congestion in some areas. System congestion refers to instances during
the operation of the power system when there is not enough transmission capacity available to
accommodate scheduled generation. Over the long-term, transmission facilities are efficiently used
where there is a manageable level of congestion. In Ontario, as the use of existing assets is being
maximized, many parts of the system are frequently congested.
Current Grid Capacity
Ontario’s power transmission system is broken down into 10 zones, as reflected in Figure 4-29.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

132

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-29 GEOGRAPHICAL ZONES IN ONTARIO’S POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM

(Source: Copyright © 2017 Independent Electricity System Operator, all rights reserved)

Supply and demand characteristics vary across each zone. As Table 4-26 demonstrates, in three
zones, Essa, Toronto and Ottawa, total resources tend to be lower than peak demand. In contrast,
supply in the Bruce and Niagara zones significantly exceed peak demand, largely due to the presence
of the Bruce nuclear generating plant and the Niagara Falls hydro facilities, respectively. In the
remaining zones, total resources either exceed or are balanced with peak demand.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

133

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-26 RESOURCES IN RELATION TO DEMAND ACROSS THE GEOGRAPHICAL ZONES IN ONTARIO'S
POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM123
Zone

Primary Energy Source

Bruce

Nuclear, with some wind

Resources significantly exceed peak demand

Niagara

Hydro, with some natural gas

Resources significantly exceed peak demand

East

Hydro, oil, and natural gas, with some wind and solar

Resources exceed peak demand

Northeast

Hydro, with some cogeneration, wind, solar, and biofuel

Resources exceed peak demand

Northwest

Hydro and biofuel, with some wind and natural gas

Resources generally exceed peak demand

West

Natural gas and wind, with some solar

Resources generally exceed peak demand

Southwest

Wind and natural gas, with some solar

Resources generally equal peak demand

Toronto

Nuclear, with some natural gas

Resources are less than peak demand

Essa

Hydro, with some natural gas

Resources are much less than peak demand

Ottawa

Cogeneration

Resources are much less than peak demand

The East and Southwest zones are not generally congested. The transmission systems in these zones
operate well below capacity, allowing for the transfer of power to the Toronto and Ottawa zones in
addition to supplying local demand.
The Toronto, Ottawa, and Essa zones are load congested. These zones rely on transfers from other
zones to meet zonal peak demand, and the transmission network within the zones operates at or near
capacity during peak load periods.
The Bruce, Niagara, and Northwest zones are generation congested. Installed generation capacity in
the zones is equal to or greater than the combination of demand within the zones and the ability to
transfer electricity out of the zone. This results in the zonal transmission systems operating at or near
capacity whenever zonal generation peaks.
The Northeast and West zones have some transfer capability available. In the Northeast zone,
congestion is more likely than in the West given that it is tied to lower-cost baseload and peaking
hydro generators. In the west zone, capability is limited when natural gas-fired generators are online.

4.3.2.3 Distribution
While some large industrial consumers are directly connected to the transmission grid and purchase
electricity from the Ontario electricity market, most industrial customers and smaller consumers,
including residential consumers, are served by local distribution companies (LDCs). LDCs own and
operate infrastructure to convert high-voltage electricity to a lower voltage, and deliver electricity to
end-users.
There are currently 78124 licensed electricity distributors operating in Ontario. In addition to
delivering electricity to end-users, LDCs perform billing functions reflecting distribution charges and
other charges, as described in Section 4.3.1.4.

123 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016c. IESO Report: Energy Storage. March. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/-/media/files/ieso/document-library/energy-storage/ieso-energy-storage-report_march-2016.pdf
124 “Licensed companies and licensing information.” 05 Oct. 2017.OEB.ca. Ontario Energy Board, n.d. Web.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

134

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.2.4 Electricity Exports
Ontario is part of North America’s large,
interconnected electricity system, allowing for
added ability to manage generation surpluses
and shortfalls. Ontario currently has
interconnections with Quebec and Manitoba in
Canada, and Minnesota, Michigan, and New
York in the United States (U.S.); and can import
and export electricity on a continual basis to
balance the province’s electricity system.

FIGURE 4-30 ONTARIO NET EXPORTS, 2007-2016125

Ontario’s interconnection with neighbouring
jurisdictions allows for the efficient import and
export of electricity based on the province’s
supply and demand levels, as well as that of its
neighbours. This allows for operational and
planning flexibility, and enhances the reliability and cost-effectiveness of the electricity system.
Ontario is a net exporter of electricity, given surplus generation in the province. Net exports have
trended up from 2007 through to 2015, from 5.1TWh to 16.8TWh, but declined to 13.9TWh in 2016, a
trend that is expected to continue based on forecasts for the demand and supply of electricity as
outlined in the ensuing sections.
Electricity exports are priced on the wholesale market, at the HOEP. As discussed in Section 4.3.1.4,
the cost of generating and transmitting electricity is reflected in other charges paid by Ontario
consumers. Therefore, while generating some revenue, exports do not allow for recovery of the full
cost of supplying the electricity exported.

4.3.3

Electricity Forecasts

With the combination of economic and population growth, and improved energy efficiency across
homes and business, all taken within the context of climate change and environmental considerations,
demand and supply profiles have changed over time. This has given rise to the need for a long-term
planning approach to meeting the Province’s energy needs.
The LTEP is produced by the Ministry and is the tool by which the province plans for long-term energy
needs and sets out long term energy policies. The planning process that LTEP follows balances costeffectiveness, reliability, clean energy, community engagement, and places emphasis on conservation
and demand management before building new generation.
Ontario’s first LTEP was released in 2010 and was updated in 2013 and again in 2017. The 2017 LTEP,
released in Fall 2017, covers the 2017-2035 planning horizon.

125 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

135

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.3.1 Ontario’s Long-term Energy Plan
The Province’s plans, as outlined in the 2013 LTEP, include:


Encouraging conservation, which will drive planning, approval and procurement processes;



Retracting on previous plans to construct two new nuclear reactors, while moving forward with
plans to decommission the Pickering Generating Station;



Increasing the installed capacity of renewable energy;



Using natural gas-fired generation to allow for flexible response to changes in demand and
supply;



Considering opportunities for clean energy imports from other jurisdictions; and



Exploring opportunities for the use of energy storage technologies.

The 2017 LTEP builds on the plans as previously outlined, with key initiatives including:


Ensuring affordable energy, with projections for the cost of electricity for large industrial
customers to, on average, increase in line with inflation over the forecast period.



Spreading the cost of existing electricity infrastructure over a longer period by refinancing a
portion of the Global Adjustment.



Supporting expanded access to natural gas.



Ensuring a flexible energy system, with a Market Renewal initiative being launched.



Maximizing use of Ontario’s existing electricity infrastructure to limit future increases in the cost of
electricity.



Removing barriers to the deployment of cost-effective energy storage.



Continued commitment to energy conservation.

Based on the LTEP, the expectation is that, by 2025, there will be a significant reduction in surplus
baseload generation (SBG), with demand response strategies addressing peak demand needs.

4.3.3.2 Ontario Planning Outlook
The Ontario Planning Outlook (OPO) was prepared by the IESO in response to the Minister’s request
for a technical report on the adequacy and reliability of Ontario’s electricity resources to support
development of the 2017 LTEP. The report reflects the IESO’s planning outlook for 2016 through to
2035 (IESO, 2017).
The OPO provides an overview of Ontario’s current electricity system, including:


A demand outlook



Potential for resources to meet that demand



Risks associated with various resources



Costs of the electricity system



An emissions outlook for the electricity system

While Ontario currently generates excess electricity, an excess is never planned. Based on the
projection included in the OPO, the expectation is that, by 2025, there will be a significant reduction
in surplus baseload generation (SBG), as discussed further in Section 4.3.3.6, with demand response
strategies addressing peak demand needs.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

136

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.3.3 Electricity Demand Forecast
The OPO considers a range of electricity demand levels in Ontario in 2035, from 133 TWh to
197 TWh, under four scenarios:


Outlook A explores lower electricity demand



Outlook B explores a level of demand that roughly matches current demand levels



Outlooks C and D explore higher demand driven by policy choices stemming from Ontario’s
Climate Change Action Plan, including assumptions around the adoption of electric vehicles and
planned electrified transit projects

The scenarios include varying assumptions regarding the level of conservation, more stringent
building codes, and higher equipment standards.
Through the LTEP, the Province is planning for a flat demand scenario as reflected in Outlook B, while
allowing for flexibility to adjust to changes in demand. Additionally, conservation and demand
response programs are expected to have a significant impact on reducing total and peak demand.
Demand Expectations
Under a flat demand outlook
(Outlook B), total electricity demand is
expected to marginally increase, at a
compounded annual growth rate of
0.16 percent, from 143.4 TWh in 2016
to 147.8 TWh in 2035 (Figure 4-31).
The stable demand outlook largely
assumes that population and economic
growth that would otherwise increase
demand are counterbalanced by
conservation measures.

FIGURE 4-31 ONTARIO NET ENERGY DEMAND ACROSS
DEMAND OUTLOOKS126

The outlook assumes an uptick in
electricity requirements for electric vehicles and planned electrified transit projects, including RER and
light rail projects as approved at the date of the report. Taken together, these initiatives are projected
to account for a total of 4 TWh in 2035, of which approximately 0.55 TWh is attributed to transit
projects. Peak demand is expected to be relatively unchanged from 2016 to 2025, ranging from 23.9
to 24.1 MW, and then increasing to 24.8 MW by 2035. Transportation is expected to account for
2 percent of peak demand in 2035 (IESO, 2016).
Under a higher demand outlook (Outlook D), in 2035 the total electricity demanded is projected to be
197 TWh. This assumes an increase in residential and commercial electricity demand due to increased
electrical space and water heating, accounting for a total increase in electricity demand of 30 TWh.
Outlook D also assumes a shift to electricity based energy generation in the industrial sector, an
increased number of electric vehicles (2.4 million by 2035), and electrification of transit, accounting
for approximately 9 TWh and 0.65 TWh, respectively. Peak demand is expected to grow to 35.4 MW
by 2035 (IESO, 2016).

126 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

137

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The difference between summer and winter
peak varies across demand outlooks and across
the forecast period. There is currently a
difference of approximately 1,800 MW between
summer and winter peak demand (Figure 4-32).
Over the forecast period, under a stable
demand outlook, the variance is expected to
increase to 2,369 MW in 2036. Under higher
demand outlooks, Ontario is expected to
become a winter peaking province; if this
occurs, the variance between summer and
winter peak demand is significantly reduced by
2025, and winter peak demand is projected to
exceed summer peak demand by as much as
6,900 MW in Outlook D128.

FIGURE 4-32 NET SUMMER PEAK MINUS NET
WINTER PEAK127

Conservation and Demand Response Programs
A significant percentage of the forecasted growth in electricity demand is expected to be offset by
conservation programs and improved codes and standards. The LTEP includes a long-term
conservation target of 30 TWh in 2032.
Demand response programs provide a variety of incentives to encourage end-users to reduce
electricity use during peak hours. Demand response initiatives led to a reduction in peak demand of
approximately 1.8 gigawatt (GW) in 2015 and are expected to reduce peak demand by 10 percent, or
approximately 2.5 GW by 2025.

4.3.3.4 Electricity Supply Forecast
Supply assumptions are based on existing
resources that have been procured but are not
yet in service, and resources that have neither
been procured nor acquired as of the date of
the OPO, but have been directed to meet
provincial policy objectives.

FIGURE 4-33 INSTALLED CAPACITY AND CAPACITY
CONTRIBUTIONS129

Assuming that all current resources continue
until contract expiration and all nuclear
refurbishments, as well as committed and
directed resources, come into service as
scheduled, total installed capacity is expected
to slowly increase from 39.6 GW in 2016 to
42.6 GW in 2035, 7 percent growth over the
Source: (IESO, 2016)
period. While the installed capacity increases,
there will be an increasing reliance on renewable energy sources, which are, in the case of solar and
wind, more variable. Accordingly, while installed capacity generally increases, except for a decline in
the late 2020s, the capacity contribution of resources is generally unchanged over the forecast period.
127 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
128 ibid.
129 ibid.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

138

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Expectations for each source of electricity, based on current resources as well as committed and
directed resources, are described in the following paragraphs.

Nuclear
While previous forecasts indicated the need for additional nuclear generating capacity, based on the
current outlook, and given revised demand forecasts, additional capacity is not necessary.
Accordingly, the Province is not planning to move ahead with plans to build additional nuclear plants
and will proceed with plans to decommission the Pickering plant, which currently has six units in
operation and an installed capacity of 3,100 MW. Two units will be retired at the end of 2022 and four
units at the end of 2024.
Nuclear energy is expected to account for 48 percent of Ontario’s electricity production in 2035
The Province retains the option to build additional nuclear capacity if future needs dictate. It is the
Ministry’s intention to maintain the licence granted by the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission for
the construction of new nuclear units.

Hydro
Ontario has significant additional hydro potential; however, most of the potential exists in relatively
remote northern communities, and would, therefore, be developed at a relatively high cost. Hydro
power is expected to account for 27 percent of total electricity production in 2035.

Natural Gas
The natural gas fleet allows for flexibility to respond to variability in renewable energy sources. This
relatively low-carbon source is, therefore, an important part of Ontario’s supply mix. Natural gas
production is expected to account for 9 percent of total electricity production in 2035.

Wind, Solar and Bioenergy
Wind, solar and bioenergy are expected to make more significant contributions to Ontario’s energy
mix in 2025 and beyond. Collectively, these non-water renewables are expected to account for
16 percent of electricity production in 2035, largely due to the expansion of wind electricity
production.

4.3.3.5 Forecasted Demand Relative to Supply
The IESO’s assessment is that there are sufficient resources to meet flat demand levels (Outlooks B),
with relatively low surplus generation during peak demand periods. The higher demand scenarios
would, however, present challenges of scale and integration, requiring the deployment of multiple
low-carbon options and significant investments in transmission and distribution systems. The OPO,
however, underscores the need for more conservation, rather than investment in additional
generating capacity, to meet the higher demand under those scenarios. The Province will be able to
adapt to a lower demand scenario by choosing not to renew existing contracts for generation upon
expiration, if the energy is not needed.
The capacity contribution (that is, maximum output) of installed capacity relative to peak demand
(including a planning reserve) under Outlook B is outlined below (Figure 4-34).

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

139

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-34 CAPACITY CONTRIBUTION VS. DEMAND
Winter Capacity Contribution vs Demand

Summer Capacity Contribution vs Demand
45,000

45,000

40,000

40,000

35,000

35,000

30,000

30,000

25,000

25,000

20,000

20,000

Outlook A

Outlook D

Outlook A

Summer Capacity Contribution

Outlook D

Winter Capacity Contribution

Source: (IESO, 2016)130

The forecast suggests that under a stable demand scenario, Ontario will generate sufficient electricity
to meet peak demand. In a higher demand outlook such as Outlook D, the province is expected to
have sufficient resources to meet demand through to 2022 however additional resources would be
required to meet demand beyond 2022. It is however noted that demand and supply forecasts are
based on a variety of assumptions, including median weather conditions and consumer preferences
such as actual adoption of electric vehicles and use of electricity for home heating, to name a few.
Extreme weather events or significant changes in consumer preferences can therefore have a
significant impact on forecasts.

4.3.3.6 Surplus Baseload Generation
SBG refers to baseload generation in excess of provincial demand plus net exports. SBG is managed
through exports, by diverting water from hydro turbines, by curtailing wind and solar generation, and
by managing units at the Bruce Nuclear Generating Station.
In FYE 2016, as shown on Figure 4-35, SBG
amounted to approximately 9 percent of
Ontario net demand. The OPO indicates that
SBG is expected to decline through to 2035,
largely due to the decommissioning of the
Pickering Nuclear Generating Station and, from
2020-2028, as units at the Darlington and Bruce
Nuclear Generating Stations are being brought
out-of-service for refurbishment in the 2020s.
Periods of SBG will be further impacted by:

FIGURE 4-35 SURPLUS BASELOAD GENERATION AS
A PERCENTAGE OF NET DEMAND



Variability in seasonal demand and supply
patterns, with period of SBG being more
prevalent in the spring and fall months



Shifting demand patterns brought on by demand response programs that seek to reduce peak
energy usage, thereby shifting demand to traditionally off-peak periods

130 Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). 2016a. Ontario Planning Outlook. September 1. Accessed October 2017.
http://www.ieso.ca/sector-participants/planning-and-forecasting/ontario-planning-outlook.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

140

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT



Increased uptake of electric vehicles, leading to increased demand for electricity overnight



Increased use of electricity for heating homes



Energy storage programs that will seek to store energy during periods of SBG, thereby limiting the
availability of surplus electricity

4.3.3.7 Forecasted Grid Capacity
Capacity of the transmission network has implications for the location, size, and number of hydrogen
generation facilities proposed to support Hydrail. Consideration would need to be given to
forecasted capacity and congestion levels within each zone of the electricity system, which will have to
be weighed against the cost associated with larger hydrogen generation and storage facilities, ability
of the supplier to exercise flexibility in the timing of hydrogen production, and the cost of hydrogen
transportation.
While congestion in the system is currently manageable, future changes in demand and supply can be
expected to increase congestion challenges as more variable and distributed energy resources come
into service. Additionally, the retirement of the Pickering Nuclear Generating Station may increase
flows from southwestern Ontario, resulting in higher congestion in the Southwest and Toronto zones.
As Figure 4-36 shows, generation capacity in the
Toronto and Bruce zones are expected to
decline by 2020, due to a reduction in nuclear
generation. Assuming flat demand, it can be
expected that load congestion in the Toronto
zone will be magnified, while generation
congestion in the Bruce zone is expected to be
somewhat alleviated, but not eliminated.

FIGURE 4-36 ZONE GENERATION CAPACITY

Generation capacity in the East, West, and
Southwest zones is expected to increase.
However, as noted in Section 4.3.2.2, these
zones are currently uncongested, with some
transfer capability.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

141

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.4

Electricity Pricing

Electricity prices in Ontario primarily comprise
the HOEP and the GA. Transmission,
distribution, regulatory, and other charges
combined may also account for roughly
20-30 percent of prices, and vary depending on
location within the transmission grid.

FIGURE 4-37 HOEP VS. GA

The HOEP is the wholesale price of electricity
and is determined in a real-time market,
operated by the IESO. The HOEP changes
hourly, based on demand and supply of
electricity. It is significantly impacted by time of
day, day of week, weather factors, and economic
conditions.
Every day, the IESO forecasts electricity demand for the days and weeks ahead. Generators and
electricity importers submit offers to supply electricity and indicate the prices they are willing to
accept. Large customers and exporters submit bids for electricity purchases at specified prices. The
IESO accepts the lowest cost offers to supply electricity to meet demand. A new market clearing price
is set every 5 minutes. The HOEP is the average of the 12 market clearing prices set in each hour. The
impact of demand and supply forces on the electricity market results in a higher HOEP during peak
demand periods and a lower HOEP during periods of excess supply (SBG).
The GA is paid by all Ontario electricity customers, and reflects the net cost of electricity generation
and the cost of delivering conservation programs. The GA varies monthly, adjusting for the difference
between the HOEP and the cost of regulated and contracted generation.
The main components of the GA are:


GA-OEFC-NUG (M$) – Contracts administered by the Ontario Electricity Financial Corporation with
existing generation facilities



GA-OPG (M$) – Ontario Power Generation nuclear and baseload hydro generating stations



GA-OPA (M$) – Contracts with the IESO (and with the former Ontario Power Authority) for new
gas-fired generation, renewable facilities, energy from waste and biomass, nuclear
refurbishments, as well as conservation programs.

4.3.4.1 Electricity Pricing for Large Businesses
Industrial customers with an average peak demand of over 1 MW and targeted manufacturing and
industrial customers with peak demand of over 500 KW and under 1MW (collectively, Class A
customers) are eligible for participation in the Industrial Conservation Initiative (ICI), which was
introduced in 2010.
Through the ICI the GA attributed to participating customers is calculated based on the customer’s
percentage contribution to the top five peak Ontario demand hours, over a 12-month base period.
The ICI, therefore, allows participating customers to manage their GA costs by reducing demand
during peak periods, and allows the province to defer building new electricity infrastructure to meet
peak demand. It is estimated that in 2016, the ICI helped to reduce peak electricity demand by
approximately 1.3 GW.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

142

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

The peak demand factor (PDF) is calculated by taking the sum of the customer’s demand during the
top five peak Ontario demand hours in the base period (May 1 to April 30), and dividing it by the total
system consumption during those hours. The calculated ratio is the customer’s peak demand factor.
The customer’s monthly GA cost is calculated by multiplying the PDF by the provincial GA cost in each
of the ensuing 12 months (July 1 to June 30).
A participating customer can manage their GA costs by reducing electricity use during forecasted
peak hours. The IESO provides tools to track current and projected demand, along with a forecast of
system conditions. Peak periods generally coincide with:


Heat waves in the summer or cold snaps in the winter



Weekday afternoons in the summer



Early weekday evenings during the winter

A customer who can significantly reduce electricity usage during peak hours will have relatively
minimal GA costs. It is however noted, as discussed in sections 4.3.3.5 and 4.3.3.6, that a variety of
factors can impact demand patterns and that demand patterns are expected to the change in the
future. An important consideration for Hydrail is that peak demand hours may be more difficult to
predict than they are presently.

4.3.4.2 Policy Initiatives Impact on Electricity Prices in Ontario
Electricity prices are driven by decisions of the past and those decisions impact prices long into the
future. Policy initiatives or pricing regimes may either shift the cost of investments from one user
group to another or defer costs to future generations, based on economic or social factors at play at
the time of consideration. As history has shown in Ontario, electricity policy and investment priorities
change over time and likely will continue to evolve as market conditions and government policy
priorities evolve.
The ICI is a policy initiative of the Government of Ontario that was designed to reduce peak demand
and to support Ontario’s industrial sector. While the ICI has effectively achieved its objective to date,
the policy could be challenged on merit, as it may be argued that the ability to shift consumption of
electricity away from peak hours should not absolve a company of its obligation to share in the costs
that the GA is designed to recover.
Notwithstanding, it is noted that electricity pricing in Ontario is generally expected to move to more of
a market-driven model. Under such a model, consumption during hours of high demand should
ultimately result in higher electricity costs, with the reverse also applying. Accordingly, while the ICI
may be terminated or decline in significance in the future, the principle upon which it is based will
likely still apply.
Other recent policy initiatives of the Province have led to an average 25 percent reduction in
electricity prices for residential and small business customers in 2017 under the Fair Hydro Act, 2017.
Initiatives under the Fair Hydro Act 2017 include refinancing of a portion of the GA to spread the cost
of electricity investments over a longer time period, thereby reflecting the longer lifecycle of existing
facilities, and sharing the costs with future generations.
As outlined in the 2017 LTEP, the government is also considering measures to provide electricity rate
assistance to non-Class A mid-sized customers (Class B customers). One such consideration is a
change to the way the GA is charged to these customers, who currently pay the same GA charges
regardless of time of use. It is not yet known whether these measures will impact the way GA costs are
charged to other customers.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

143

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.4.3 Market Renewal
Market Renewal is a set of initiatives intended to redesign Ontario’s electricity market, leading to
reduced supply costs and increased flexibility. These initiatives will:


Improve the way Ontario acquires supply to meet medium- and long-term needs;



Enable the IESO to more cost-effectively schedule and dispatch electricity to meet demand as it
changes from hour-to-hour and minute-to-minute; and



Increase flexibility, enabling the IESO to more efficiently manage unexpected short-term changes
to the system, like those that can be caused by variable generation such as wind and solar.

Market renewal is expected to result in cost savings, given more efficient use of existing assets, which
is consistent with the province’s long-term plans. It will also lead to greater market competition and a
more flexible procurement process that is better aligned with system needs.

4.3.4.4 Pricing Outlook
Under Outlook B, the IESO expects that the average unit cost of operating the electricity system will
gradually increase to $152/MWh by 2025, relative to $144/MWh in 2016. Thereafter, the cost is
expected to generally decline to $131/MWh by 2035. The decline is based on the renewal of existing
generating contracts at lower rates, as existing generators continue to operate at costs below existing
contract rates, and given reduced investment in electricity resources.
Under Outlook D, the cost of electricity in
2025 is expected to range from $155/MWh to
$160/MWh, given the need to invest in
additional resources to meet higher demand,
while keeping emissions low. The average
unit cost is expected to generally decline,
ranging from $137/MWh to $142/MWh by
2035, as existing contracts are renewed at
lower rates and higher volumes reduce the
average cost of operation.

FIGURE 4-38 CLASS A ELECTRICITY PRICE FORECAST

The projection for the price of electricity for a
typical large industrial customer, as presented
in the 2017 LTEP is outlined in Figure 4-38.
The all-in price of electricity, reflecting the HOEP, transmission, regulatory and other costs, and the
GA, is expected to range from $102/MWh in 2025 to $116/MWh in 2035.

4.3.5

Implications for Hydrail

4.3.5.1 Provincial Policy Objectives
Electrification of transportation, both by means of overhead electrification and using HFC technology,
is consistent with policy objectives as set out in the Premier’s mandate letter to the Minister of Energy.
The use of HFC technology presents the added benefit of supporting the growth of the low-carbon
economy and the reduction of GHG emissions, by potentially allowing for a broader replacement of
diesel trains on the GO network with electric trains than would be possible through overhead
electrification. Further to this, Hydrail could allow for load-shifting, by consuming electricity when
there is SBG, versus adding to peak demand as would be the case with overhead electrification.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

144

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

Hydrail, therefore, also could support the Province’s goal of driving efficiencies and limiting
expenditure on new electricity infrastructure.

4.3.5.2 Capturing SBG
The assessment shows that, while the level of SBG is expected to decline, electricity production is
expected to exceed Ontario net demand by 1-4 percent from 2024 to 2035. There are however
seasonal variations in the level of SBG and, particularly given the increasing reliance on renewable
energy in the province’s energy supply mix, weather related factors can further impact electricity
generation, and therefore SBG. SBG is often available over short periods of time and to fully capture it
would require an infrastructure build-out that would allow for the production and storage of hydrogen
over short periods of time, which would be idle outside of these periods.
The ability to harness SBG to produce hydrogen is a function of the scale of hydrogen production
(current density) and storage (volume) infrastructure, relative to when the SBG is available. Using
hydrogen production and storage assumptions from the Hydrail simulation model, along with
demand projections as presented in the 2016 OPO, modelling work shows that only approximately
14-35 percent of the annual amount of hydrogen required to support Hydrail can be produced from
electricity supplied during periods of SBG over the 2025-2035 time frame. Furthermore, the same
analysis shows that only 6-23 percent of operating days over the forecast period could be fully
supplied by SBG.
A further consideration is the province’s plans to incorporate energy storage technologies in
managing the electricity system. The use of such technologies will lead to a further reduction in excess
supply, as surpluses would be at least partially captured and stored by the province, thereby reducing
the amount supplied to the market. The use of energy storage technologies would limit the ability of
market participants to capture surplus baseload generation.
Therefore, it is unlikely that the Hydrail System will be able to operate solely on electricity produced
during periods of SBG. Accordingly, while the system would be able to avoid Ontario peak demand
hours, therefore producing during off-peak hours, the system as currently designed, will not be able
to consistently minimize the price of electricity, as it will be limited by the density of the hydrogen
production facilities and the capacity of the hydrogen storage facilities.

4.3.5.3 Electricity Pricing
As noted in the preceding sections, the HOEP is market driven, with lower prices during periods
where the supply of electricity exceeds demand. Further to this, based on the current pricing structure
and government policy initiatives, the ability to consume electricity outside of peak provincial demand
hours can allow for the elimination of GA costs. On this basis, assuming the current pricing and policy
regimes remain in effect, Hydrail presents certain benefits in respect of the unit cost of electricity
relative to overhead electrification. These benefits are derived from the flexibility to schedule
hydrogen production outside of Ontario peak demand hours, thereby minimizing or avoiding GA
charges, and at times of lower HOEP thereby realizing lower electricity costs. This benefit must be
weighed against the increased rate of consumption of electricity (for traction) in the case of Hydrail
relative to overhead electrification, which could somewhat negate the unit cost advantage of Hydrail
when considering the total overall cost of electricity.
A further consideration is the potential shift in provincial demand patterns and the impact this will
have on the peak/off-peak variance in the HOEP. The production of hydrogen will result in an increase
in demand for electricity during periods of hydrogen production, which, given the significant load it
will represent, could cause upward pressure on prices during that period. Additionally, as the
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

145

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

province encourages the electrification of transit and demand response programmes, both of which
shift demand away from peak periods, it can be expected that there will be increased demand for
electricity during traditional off-peak periods, which could in-turn increase the HOEP during these
periods. This will likely result in a reduction of the variance in HOEP, and therefore also a reduction in
cost advantage for consumption during traditional off-peak periods. Should this be the case, the unit
cost advantage of Hydrail relative to overhead electrification will be partially eroded.
The government’s ICI program is intended to help flatten out the daily energy consumption profile by
shifting demand to off peak periods. The success of these programs can be viewed as a risk to the
Hydrail business case, especially considering the significant electricity requirements to produce
hydrogen at the required scale for the rail network.

4.3.5.4 Location of Hydrogen Generation Facilities
As noted in Section 4.3.2.2, there are load and generation constraints in some zones across the
Ontario electricity system. At present, decentralized hydrogen production to support Hydrail is being
considered. Relative to centralized production, decentralized production would allow for smaller
loads being drawn across different zones of the grid, from production facilities located along each line
of the GO network. There are pros and cons to decentralized production, depending on the capacity
constraints within the zones being contemplated and the location of potential hydrogen generation
facilities relative to the GO network. Such matters would be resolved through detailed planning and
procurement activities.
The GO network extends across the East, Essa, Toronto and Southwest zones. In the East and
Southwest zones, generation either exceeds or meets peak demand, with generation capacity
expected to increase by 2020. Both zones are generally uncongested, and should therefore allow for
additional loads. The Lakeshore East line extends into the East zone, while the Lakeshore West and
Kitchener lines extends into the Southwest zone.
In the Toronto and Essa zones, resources are less than peak demand, and both zones are load
congested. The situation within the Toronto zone is expected to be magnified by the anticipated
decommissioning of the Pickering nuclear generating plant by 2024.
All GO lines run through the Toronto zone, however there may be locational challenges within the
zone (space, property zoning, environmental, price), which may be compounded by limited public
acceptance, particularly given the urban setting, as discussed in Section 4.8. The Barrie, Stouffville and
Richmond Hill lines all run through the Essa zone.
A decentralized approach to hydrogen production (described in Section 4.1) would involve the
establishment of generation facilities along each line of GO network, crossing each of the four zones
discussed. The significant advantage of decentralized generation is the cost advantage of smaller
facilities along each line of the GO network. Based on the foregoing, there may however, be other
challenges associated with this approach. One significant challenge is the limited capacity within
Toronto, a situation that is expected to persist for the foreseeable future.
A similar challenge would also be faced in the Essa zone. Further to this, consideration should also be
given to the competing demands of electric vehicles, the continued adoption of which the 2017 LTEP
acknowledges could have a significant impact on the province’s distribution network. Should
hydrogen generation facilities be established within these zones, careful planning would be required
to ensure hydrogen generation does not inadvertently stress local grids.
Centralized hydrogen production facilities could be placed within the East zone, along the Lakeshore
East line. In a semi-centralized scenario, hydrogen generation facilities could be located in the East
and Southwest zones, along the Lakeshore East, Lakeshore West and Kitchener Lines.
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

146

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.6

Electricity Pricing Forecast for Hydrail

Electricity prices for RER under Hydrail have been projected based on forecasted electricity prices in
Ontario and the Hydrail production simulation model. The electricity price assumptions are outlined in
Table 4-27.
TABLE 4-27 ELECTRICITY PRICE ASSUMPTIONS
Price Component
Hourly Ontario
Electricity Price
(HOEP)

Assumptions
The forward looking HOEP was estimated by IESO using the following logic:


Historical HOEP pattern for each year was developed by dividing each hourly HOEP by the
annual average to get the yearly mean-normal pattern.



The most representative historical HOEP pattern was selected for each of the projected years
(2017-2035)



Historical HOEP patterns were scaled to the appropriate annual average marginal cost using
numbers in-line with the 2017 LTEP.

Global Adjustment

The forward-looking GA charges are based on the forecast presented in the 2013 LTEP for a
typical industrial customer. It is noted that, with the introduction of Hydrail, projected GA charges
may be impacted, as discussed in Section 4.3.4. An assessment of the impact of same is,
however, not within the scope of this study, and accordingly no adjustments have been made to
the forecasts presented in the LTEP.

Regulatory and
Transmission charges

The forward looking regulatory and transmission charges are based on the forecast presented in
the 2013 LTEP.

The Hydrail Operational Simulation Model (described in Section 4.4.1) includes an algorithm that uses
the HOEP price and the amount of hydrogen required for the Hydrail System to create a hydrogen
production schedule that minimizes the cost of electricity, subject to the capacity of the hydrogen
production and storage facilities.
Given the optimized production schedule as described above, no electricity would be consumed
during Ontario peak hours and therefore, under the ICI, the system would not be subject to GA. The
ICI is however, a policy initiative and therefore subject to changes as discussed in section 4.3.4.1. On
this basis, two pricing scenarios were developed based on whether the system is subject to GA
charges.
In the low case, the electricity price is estimated based on the assumption that the system operator
pays no GA charge. In the high case, it is assumed that the ICI is discontinued and therefore, the
operator pays full GA charges.
The electricity pricing scenarios for Hydrail are presented in Table 4-28.
TABLE 4-28 ELECTRICITY PRICE FORECAST FOR HYDRAIL BASED ON ONTARIO’S 2017 LTEP
2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030

2031

2032

2033

2034

2035

Low Case ($/MWh)

34.2

35.6

41.2

39.3

40.3

41.5

42.6

43.8

44.4

45.2

46.4

48.4

High Case ($/MWh)

68.7

61.7

77.1

73.9

74.6

73.8

72.7

72.9

74.2

75.2

76.1

77.9

The 10-year average electricity price for Hydrail is estimated at $46 /MWh and $76 /MWh without and
with GA, respectively.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

147

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.3.7

Summary of Key Findings

The foregoing assessment of the Ontario electricity system, pricing and policies indicates that in
considering electrification of the GO network with Hydrail, electricity pricing assumptions must
consider:


The possibility of being unable to consistently capture SBG due to an increase in demand for
electricity, combined with relatively stable supply, increased use of energy storage technologies
and reducing the occurrence of SBG. Due to these factors as well as the limitations of the
production and storage facilities, conservative assumptions should be made about capturing SBG
and the electricity prices associated with off-peak energy usage.



A change in electricity pricing policy negatively impacting on electricity pricing. As noted in
Section 4.3.4, the current pricing regime may change such that the ability to avoid GA charges
does not persist in the future. This will have a significant impact on the overall cost of electricity
and will reduce the unit price advantage that would be afforded to Hydrail under the current
regime.



A shift in demand profiles leading to a smaller differential in peak and off-peak pricing peak. The
load presented by Hydrail is significant; therefore, it will impact provincial electricity, given the
shift in the demand profile during off-peak periods. This will reduce the differential between peak
and off-peak hours, thereby reducing the unit price advantage of Hydrail relative to overhead
electrification.



The impact of the added load required by Hydrail on overall electricity prices (given an increase in
demand). In addition to impacting electricity pricing during off-periods, the load introduced by
Hydrail will increase overall demand for electricity, also driving an overall increase in the price of
electricity, given the expectation for supply to remain relatively constant. A further consideration is
the impact on the GA, as an increased load consuming what would otherwise be surplus
electricity, should result in a general reduction in the GA charges applied across all customers.

Further to this, in determining whether to take a centralized or decentralized approach to hydrogen
generation, careful consideration should be given to load constraints within different zones of the
electricity system, and the implication for the ability to operate electrolyzers without any destabilizing
effects on the electricity grid.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

148

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

4.4

Costs and Benefits

One of the primary goals of the feasibility study is to analyze the anticipated financial impact of Hydrail
on the RER program. To perform this analysis in a way that will allow for a comparison of Hydrail and
the currently contemplated electrification scenarios, models that are in use by Metrolinx were used as
the starting point for the analysis presented in this section.
The financial impact was analyzed by following six steps:
1. The GO RER network was modelled by CNL (the “Hydrail Operational Simulation Model”) to
determine the requirements of a Hydrail System (quantity of hydrogen needed, infrastructure
requirements, fuelling).
2. The IBC model from 2014 was analyzed to gain an understanding of how the BCR was developed
and to identify the key items that would change under a Hydrail scenario.
3. Relevant cost inputs from the Hydrail simulation model were used to update the IBC model. An
interface sheet was developed to capture capital, capital replacement, operating, and
maintenance costs for Hydrail.
4. Low- and high-cost scenarios were developed for key input variables (for example, cost of
electricity, capital costs of Hydrail components and life cycle of assets). These assumptions were
used to develop a range of costs for the Hydrail System.
5. A sensitivity analysis was then performed to determine which cost inputs have the most significant
impact on total cost. Those costs were then further scrutinized.
6. Based on the results of the sensitivity analysis, Low- and high-cost ranges were finalized to allow
for comparison with overhead electrification.
The financial modelling process is shown in Figure 4-39. Each step in the modelling process will be
reviewed in more details in the sections that follows.

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

149

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-39 HYDRAIL MODELLING PROCESS
Modeling Stage
Review of RER
Benefit‐Cost
Ratio (BCR)

Incremental Benefits of RER

÷

• New & existing transit user time
savings
• Peak & off‐peak road user time savings
• Automobile operating cost reduction
• Safety benefits

Operating Costs:
• Crew, fuel costs
• Rolling stock, infrastructure
maintenance
• Electrification OPEX
• Other

BCR
Capital Costs:
• Infrastructure, fleet, car
parking, maintenance facility,
property costs
• Union station costs
• Electrification CAPEX
• Other

3.07

Incremental Costs of RER Hydrail

Hydrail System
Modeling
Unchanged

Comparative IBC
Analysis

Incremental Costs of RER

Unchanged

Hydrail simulation including updates to costs associated with electrification,
including high/low estimations for:
• CAPEX
• OPEX
• Maintenance

Updated to include incremental Costs of RER hydrail

2.65 – 3.01

Identify three cost inputs which explain variability in capital
and operating costs

Sensitivity
Analysis

Unchanged

Hydrial CAPEX, OPEX and Maintenance cost most sensitive to:
• Price of fuel cells ($/kW)
• Lifetime of fuel cells (hours)
• Cost of electricity ($/MWh)

Notes:
CAPEX = capital expense
OPEX = operating expense

4.4.1

Review of RER Benefit to Cost Ratio Development

The model used for purposes of the feasibility study is the IBC for RER. The IBC model was developed
by a team of Metrolinx staff and consultants in April 2014 in response to the commitment made by the
Province of Ontario to implement RER within a 10-year period. The IBC model outlines the business
case to support RER. Outputs include net benefits, system costs and BCRs. Net benefits explain
whether a scheme is actually worthwhile as a whole, and if it is, by how much. For instance, time
savings to existing and new transit users is a benefit of RER. A complete list of benefits is provided in
the ensuing sections. The BCR also shows how much confidence is required in the accuracy of the
cost and revenue estimates. System costs include capital costs and operating costs, which will be
discussed in detail in the following sections.
The IBC model includes virtually every aspect of the GO rail system and models the impact of
converting the system from a diesel-powered commuter railway to an electric regional express system
that will provide faster, more frequent and all-day services across the Greater Toronto and Hamilton
Area (GTHA). The model includes a financial case (i.e., estimation of capital costs, overheads,
revenues, other income), an economic case (i.e., estimation of benefits), and a deliverability and
operations case (i.e., Union Station, maintenance facilities, and operating and maintenance cost

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

150

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

estimates). The IBC model evaluates benefits and costs associated with five different build-out and
operating scenarios131, including:


Scenario 1: Do Minimum - Peak-focussed limited capital with no electrification.



Scenario 2: Two-Way All-Day - Enhanced diesel service on all corridors with no electrification.



Scenario 3: 10-Year Plan - Frequent service on most inner corridors with limited electrification.



Scenario 4: Full Build (Beyond 10-Year Plan) - Frequent service on all inner corridors with full
electrification.



Scenario 5: Optimized (10-Year Plan Optimized) - Frequent service on most inner corridors with
significant electrification will be achieved under this scenario.

The IBC model evaluates each scenario over 60 years, from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2074.
All monetary values are in 2014 Canadian dollars. Except where otherwise indicated, future values are
presented as net present value (NPV), using a real discount rate of 3.5 percent per year. The model
has provision for escalation of many costs and for some other key assumptions, including train crew
wage rates, diesel fuel, traction electricity, cost of driving, value of time (VOT) and average GO rail
fares. Automobile operating costs are assumed to rise at 0.7 percent per year in real values, while
VOT is assumed to increase at 1.6 percent per year in real values. All benefit and cost figures are
calculated as incremental to the Do Minimum scenario, which forms the base case.
Examples of variables included in the IBC model include project timing, rolling stock and fleet
configurations, train services, network infrastructure and connectivity, track ownership, station and
maintenance facilities, fares, ridership/demand, economic benefits, bus operations, parking, and
others to enable monitoring of economic attractiveness. Figure 4-40 illustrates the modular
construction of the model.

131 GO RER Initial Business Case
http://www.metrolinx.com/en/regionalplanning/projectevaluation/benefitscases/GO_RER_Initial_Business_Case_EN.pdf
CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

151

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

FIGURE 4-40 MODULAR CONSTRUCTION OF THE IBC MODEL

To the extent possible, the IBC model reflects the structure of costs and understanding of passenger
behaviour. Unit rates and total rates of growth, including costs, revenues and productivity factors,
have been calibrated against actual experience, either by GO or by comparable operators.
Infrastructure capital costs are based on recent GO project costs. The IBC model can be used to test
different service options, assumptions and policies.
Table 4-29 includes key economic, cost, and policy assumptions included in the IBC model.
TABLE 4-29 KEY ASSUMPTIONS INCLUDED IN THE IBC MODEL
Item

Assumption

Project Life

60 years

Discount Rate

3.5% percent

Implementation

All new services commence 2024

Underlying Demand Growth

2.3% per year on average (varies by route) to 2044; in all
scenarios, peak capacity is added to maintain current
average train loads

Fares

No changes to 2015 fare structures; no real increases in
fares (i.e., no fare increases ever)

Other Charges

Other charges are assumed, represented by a potential
parking charge implemented before the end of the RER
program

Costs

No real increase in train crew labour, diesel fuel or
electricity costs

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

152

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

TABLE 4-29 KEY ASSUMPTIONS INCLUDED IN THE IBC MODEL
Item

Assumption

Auto Operating Costs

$0.63 per kilometre, increasing at 0.7% per year to 2044

Environmental Assessment, Engineering and Design

15% percent of base capital costs

Infrastructure (Corridors)

Contingency – 50% of base capital costs
Productivity and resource factor – 25% of base capital costs

Infrastructure (System-wide components)

Contingency – 50% of base capital costs

Costs in the IBC Model
The IBC model includes capital and operating costs as categorized in Table 4-30.
TABLE 4-30 CATEGORIZATION OF COSTS IN THE IBC
Capital Costs
Infrastructure (stations, tracks, retaining walls)
Electrification capital costs
Property
Car parking
Fleet
Union Station capital costs
CN and CP Accommodation
CBTC signalling system
PTC
Electrification of Willowbrook
EMU Maintenance Facility
Other
Operating Costs
Crew
Fuel
Electricity for Traction
Rolling Stock Maintenance
Infrastructure Maintenance
User Charges - Plant and Roadway
Other
Notes:
CN = Canadian National Railway
CP = Canadian Pacific Railway
PTC = positive train control

CPG-PGM-RPT-245
DATE: 02/02/2018

153

Revision B

HYDRAIL FEASIBILITY STUDY REPORT

IBC Model: Capital Costs
Capital cost estimates were completed in 2014 based, wherever possible, on GO’s most recent
project experience. This is the case mostly with track, stations, civil infrastructure (such as bridges),
retaining walls, noise walls, road-rail and rail-rail grade separations, conventional signalling, diesel
locomotives, unpowered bi-level cars and property acquisition. Electrification, electric rolling stock,
and advanced train control prices were based on a range of industry sources, both published and
